2012-04-20
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Call_for_Media_International_Space_Station_symposium_in_Berlin
Call for Media: International Space Station symposium in Berlin
PR 11 2012 - Top scientists and heads of the five International Space Station partner space agencies will meet in Berlin on 2–4 May to present results from more than ten years of scientific activities on the orbital outpost and to elaborate on future research perspectives.
The international symposium, organised by ESA, will bring together representatives from the five Station partner agencies, other spacefaring nations, the international science community, space experts, astronauts, engineers and representatives from industry and academia.
ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain, NASA administrator Charles Bolden and DLR German space agency CEO Johann-Dietrich Wörner, among others, will review and discuss the key accomplishments to date.
They will look at case studies in fundamental and applied research and the actual or potential spin-offs, and discuss the path and priorities for future research on the Station.
The symposium, held at the Berlin Hilton, will be broadcast live on the web at http://www.esa.int
Media interested in attending the event are requested to register via the following link:http://www.amiando.com/ISS-Symposium2012.html
A press conference with participation from leaders of all the space agencies will summarise the symposium on 4 May beginning at 12:00 CEST.
There will also be interview opportunities after the Agencies Leaders’ Roundtable on 2 May at 15:15–15:45 CEST and after the press conference on 4 May.
Scientific achievements and benefits for humankind
More than ten years ago, the first module of the Space Station began offering scientists a unique microgravity research laboratory. The first day of the symposium will look back on this exemplary international cooperation and highlight research on the Station for the benefit of humankind, and the Station as a stepping stone for future human exploration.
Day 2 will focus on scientific achievements and case studies, with presentations from leading scientists.
Research on the Station covers a wide scientific spectrum, from fundamental physics with the detection of dark matter and antimatter, the conception of space clocks or the definition of advanced materials and processes, to domains like biology, biotechnology and human research.
Attention will also be given to some research benefits such as medical applications.
Day 3 will look towards future strategies for research on the Station by the five partner agencies.
For more information and the full programme, please visit:
http://www.isssymposium2012.com
Venue: Hilton Berlin
Mohrenstrasse 3010117 Berlin, Germany
For further information, please contact:
ESA Media Relations Office
Communication Department
Tel: + 33 1 53 69 72 99
Fax: + 33 1 53 69 76 90Email: media@esa.int