2012-02-20
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/ATV/SpaceTweetup_to_highlight_ATV_mission
SpaceTweetup to highlight ATV mission
ESA and the French space agency, CNES, are inviting 60 Twitter followers to a joint European SpaceTweetup in Toulouse, France, for the docking of ATV Edoardo Amaldi to the International Space Station next month.
A Tweetup is an informal, educational gathering of people who use the Twitter social messaging medium. This one is open to anyone who follows an ESA or CNES Twitter account.
The joint SpaceTweetup is an opportunity to learn more about the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) series of missions to the Space Station, how astronauts work with ATV and the vessels' vital roles in supporting research on the orbital outpost.
The Tweetup will take place at the CNES Toulouse Space Centre overnight during the docking of ATV-3, Edoardo Amaldi, set for 19 March at 04:05 CET. ATV missions are operated from the centre by a joint ESA/CNES team.
For Twitter users following ESA or CNES
The goal of the Tweetup is to allow people who regularly interact with each other via Twitter on space topics to meet in person and discuss their favourite subject: space!
This event is designed for Twitter users who follow an account operated by ESA or CNES (see links at right).
Applicants should note that the Tweetup could be delayed or replanned based on the actual progress of ATV launch and docking preparations.
Application deadline
The application window is open now and closes on 26 February at 22:00 CET. The number of participants is limited to 60; all others will be placed on a waiting list. Selected applicants will be notified by email on 29 February.
An application is for one person only and is non-transferable. Please do not submit multiple applications.
Please note that neither CNES nor ESA will cover travel, accommodation or other expenses. All registrants must be at least 18 years old.
Application & further information
Full details, conditions and online application.