2011-05-03
https://www.esa.int/Education/Teachers_Corner/ESA_s_2011_teachers_summer_workshop
ESA's 2011 teachers summer workshop
ESA is organising a workshop for science teachers at the European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), Noordwijk, the Netherlands, from 11 to 14 July 2011.
The workshop is aimed at European science teachers whose students are between 12 and 18 years old. A limited number of places are available. Details on how to apply can be found on the 'How to apply' page.
Develop new skills and network with teachers from across Europe
This 2011 workshop is the second in the Teachers Summer Workshop series organised by ESA.
Participants will have the opportunity to gain practical skills that will enable them to enhance their teaching of the sciences. New, innovative, and inspiring tools and methods will be presented, using space as a means for attracting students to science.
The programme is designed to provide participants with ample time during the workshop to test the activities and become sufficiently confident with the material so that they can adapt it to the requirements of their national curricula.
During the 2011 workshop, teachers will participate in a programme of activities that will take the teachers on a voyage through the Solar System. They will look at how humans explore space, the science of the Sun, and the study of Earth from space.
How and when to apply
The deadline was 9 June 2011.
Workshop details
The workshop will begin at 10:00 on Monday 11 July and finish at 16:00 on Thursday 14 July. A provisional programme is available on the right of this page.
The working language of the workshop will be English. Participants are required to have sufficient knowledge of the English language in order to be able to fully participate in the hands-on activities.
Attendance to the entire workshop is mandatory.
The use of a personal laptop is highly recommended. Network access will be organised within the workshop location.
A limited amount of financial support that can be used to offset travel cost is available to teachers from Member and Cooperating States. Their accommodation will be organised and covered by ESA directly. There is no fee for the workshop.
The programme for the workshop can be found here.
Contact
ESA Education, education@esa.int
Please note that the conditions detailed above are subject to change without prior notice.