2010-07-12
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/ESA_at_Farnborough_air_show_19_25_July2
ESA at Farnborough air show, 19–25 July
ESA, together with the UK Space Agency, the Italian space agency and industry, will be exhibiting its wide range of activities in a dedicated Space Zone at the Farnborough International Air Show during 19–25 July.
The Space Zone brings together key players from space agencies and industry to highlight the increasing role of space in a rapidly changing world.
ESA showcases the importance of space systems and applications in facing global challenges and providing decision-makers with tools to respond to critical challenges such as climate change and global security.
The exhibition highlights the many dimensions of space: space for a better understanding of our Earth and the Universe; space as a generator of new technologies and innovation; space for future human endeavour; and space for improving the quality of life and fostering European growth and employment.
Visitors are introduced to Europe’s Spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana, where the Vega and Russian-built Soyuz rockets will soon be launched for the first time, creating, along with Ariane 5, a wide range of launch services.
The different facets of our ever-changing planet are emphasised: atmosphere, oceans, land and ice. The first results from ESA’s three latest Earth Explorer satellites are presented.
Examples of services from GMES – the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security initiative – are displayed: daily air-quality forecasts, monitoring of ground movement, ocean and coastal areas, risk and emergencies.
The first satellites to be launched in 2011 as part of the Galileo satellite navigation system are shown, together with a focus on aviation applications using EGNOS, the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service.
Telecommunications satellites are highlighted with the coming launch of Hylas, a public–private partnership between ESA and Avanti Communications (UK) to target the high demand for broadband services in Europe that cannot be met by terrestrial networks.
Europe’s contributions to the International Space Station are featured, including the Columbus laboratory, the Automated Transfer Vehicle, Cupola and Node-3.
The exhibition also includes the new ESA astronaut candidates and the next missions to the Space Station.
A special display shows the spectacular new results from ESA’s Herschel and Planck astronomy satellites, and a simulated Mars terrain features scale models of the three European elements of the ESA–NASA ExoMars programme.
The show is open from Monday 19 July to Sunday 25 July, with trade visitor days 19–23 July and access by the general public 24–25 July.
A series of high-level events in the Space Zone include a dedicated Space Day conference on Wednesday 21 July and a Futures Day for students and schools on Friday 23 July.
A longer version of this article can be seen here