2009-07-17
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Alisse_Mission/Media_accreditation_for_Shuttle_flight_STS-128_with_ESA_astronaut_Christer_Fuglesang
Media accreditation for Shuttle flight STS-128 with ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang
The media accreditation deadline for the next Space Shuttle flight to the International Space Station has been set by NASA. Discovery is tentatively slated for launch on 18 August to begin its mission, STS-128. The application deadline for credentials for international reporters is 31 July.
STS-128 will deliver nearly 15 000 kg of equipment, including: science and storage racks; a freezer to store research samples; and the Colbert treadmill.
Discovery will transport a Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) in its payload bay. The Italian-built MPLMs are pressurised cargo containers used to carry science and storage racks to the International Space Station (ISS). Once at the Station, the MPLM is transferred by robotic arm from the Shuttle’s cargo bay and temporarily attached to the ISS as a pressurised module.
The seven-member STS-128 crew includes ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang, making his second spaceflight. The 13-day mission will feature three spacewalks, with Fuglesang taking part in two. Once at the Station, he will meet ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, aboard the ISS since June.
Journalists wishing to attend the launch at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida, or wishing to cover the mission from other NASA centres, must apply for credentials via NASA. To be accredited, reporters must work for verifiable news-gathering organisations. No substitutions of credentials are allowed at any NASA facility.
Apply for KSC credentials
Reporters applying for credentials at KSC should submit requests at: https://media.ksc.nasa.gov
Reporters must use work email addresses, not personal accounts, when applying. After accreditation is approved, applicants will receive confirmation via email.
KSC now will allow international journalists unescorted access to the press site with an additional security step. Details will be emailed to those journalists after they apply online.
Accredited media representatives with mission badges will have access to KSC from launch through the end of the mission. Application deadline for international reporters is 31 July. Those also wishing to visit NASA's Johnson Space Center during the mission should contact the Johnson newsroom on 281-483-5111.
Reporters with special logistic requests for KSC, such as space for satellite trucks, trailers, electrical connections or work space, must contact Laurel Lichtenberger at laurel.a.lichtenberger@nasa.gov by 7 August. The free wireless Internet access provided at KSC’s news centre is no longer available.
Work space in the news centre and the news centre annex is provided on a first-come basis, limited to one space per organisation. To set up temporary telephone, fax, ISDN or network lines, media representatives must make arrangements with BellSouth at 800-213-4988. Reporters must have an assigned seat in the KSC newsroom prior to setting up lines. To obtain an assigned seat, contact Patricia Christian at patricia.christian-1@nasa.gov.
Journalists must have a public affairs escort to all other areas of KSC except the Launch Complex 39 cafeteria.
For further information:
Brigitte Kolmsee
ESA Media Relations Office
Communication and Knowledge Department
Tel: +33 (0)1 53 69 72 99
Fax: +33 (0)1 53 69 76 90Email: Brigitte.Kolmsee @ esa.int