2009-06-10
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Be_part_of_a_space_mission_help_ESA_name_next_European_mission_to_the_ISS
Be part of a space mission: help ESA name next European mission to the ISS
Following the enthusiastic response to earlier competitions to name European astronaut missions, ESA's Directorate of Human Spaceflight is once again giving European citizens the opportunity to be part of a space mission by suggesting a name for ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang's mission to the International Space Station.
Fuglesang will join the 11-day STS-128 mission to the International Space Station (ISS) as a Mission Specialist. Currently scheduled for launch with Space Shuttle Discovery on 6 August 2009, this will be Fuglesang’s second spaceflight after his 13-day Celsius mission to the ISS with STS-116 in December 2006.
On his arrival at the Station, Fuglesang will meet up with ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, who is now a member of the resident ISS Expedition 20 crew. At the time of Fuglesang's arrival, the Station will be occupied by a six-strong crew that includes astronauts from four different space agencies: ESA, NASA, Roscosmos and the Canadian Space Agency.
As well as conducting scientific experiments and Earth observation activities, Fuglesang will carry out two of the three scheduled spacewalks. His tasks during the spacewalks are to remove an empty Ammonia Tank Assembly and to prepare the ISS for the arrival of Node 3, which is a European-built connecting module. During the first spacewalk, the European Technology Exposure Facility (EuTEF) will be dismounted from outside the European Columbus laboratory. EuTEF will return to Earth together with Fuglesang on STS-128.
Fuglesang will also be responsible for the Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM), an Italian-developed cargo module that is used to carry cargo, such as science and storage racks, food, clothes and water, to the Station. The MPLM will fly to the ISS in the payload bay of Space Shuttle Discovery: once at the Station it will be transferred by robotic arm from the Shuttle cargo bay and attached to the ISS as a pressurised module, giving the crew access to unload the cargo.
“The overwhelming response to previous competitions to name ESA missions, from people of all ages and from all European countries, shows how attractive and inspiring human spaceflight is for many Europeans,” says Piero Messina, Head of the Coordination Office in ESA's Directorate of Human Spaceflight. “This mission occurs at a very exciting time for human spaceflight and exploration, especially for Europe. This mission in particular is a truly European one: with a Swedish ESA astronaut being responsible for the transport of an Italian cargo module, who will meet up with a Belgian ESA astronaut on the ISS who is serving as a member of the Expedition crew. We are looking forward once more to receiving many enthusiastic proposals.”
The competition is open to all citizens and residents of the ESA Member States*. The winning name will become the official European name of Fuglesang's mission and the winner will receive a frame with the mission logo signed by European astronauts.
How to participate
The name has to reflect the following aspects:
Europe is an important player in human spaceflight and explorationHumans are explorers by nature. Europe has a legacy in exploring Earth and will live up to it by playing an increasing role in present and future human spaceflight and exploration undertakings.
ESA cooperates with the international partners in human spaceflight and explorationThe ISS is a great example of international cooperation. By contributing with people and modules ESA confirms its commitment to cooperate with its international partners also in further space exploration missions
Conditions
* Citizens or residents of the following states are allowed to participate in the competition: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.