2009-03-13
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/King_Albert_II_to_visit_European_Astronaut_Centre
King Albert II to visit European Astronaut Centre
ESA PR 05-2009. Their Majesties Albert II King of the Belgians and Queen Paola will be visiting the European Astronaut Centre of the European Space Agency (ESA) in Cologne, Germany, on 19 March 2009. Media representatives are invited to attend.
At the European Astronaut Centre (EAC), King Albert and Queen Paola will meet ESA astronaut Frank De Winne who is currently training for his upcoming long-duration mission onboard the International Space Station. They will also be informed by ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain of the Agency’s activities and Belgium’s contribution in particular.
The royal party will be accompanied by Sabine Laruelle, Federal Minister of Science Policy, and Pieter De Crem, Belgian Minister of Defence.
Media representatives wishing to attend this event on 19 March are kindly requested to fill in the attached accreditation form and return it by fax or email to EAC by 17 March.
About EAC
The European Astronaut Centre located in Cologne, Germany, is home to the European Astronaut Corps. It defines, prepares and implements astronaut training programmes for a variety of missions, including activities for the International Space Station. The Centre coordinates cooperation on astronaut training between ESA and its international partners. It is responsible for the preparation, planning and scheduling of European astronaut tasks and flight assignments and coordinates astronaut activities with other countries. ESA is currently in the process of selecting a new batch of European astronauts.
Further information:
Jean Coisne
Head of EAC Communications & PR Office
Communication and Knowledge DepartmentTel: +49 2203 6001 110
Programme
11:05 Arrival at EAC main entrance, welcomed by:
11:10 Arrival at meeting room
12:25 End of meeting
12:45 Arrival of King Albert II at cafeteria
13:15 Lunch for the press provided by ESA
14:00 Guided tour of EAC training facilities by Frank De Winne covering:
14:45 End of visit