2009-03-02
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Help_to_define_a_lunar_lander
Help to define a lunar lander
RFI submission deadline is at 10:00 CEST on 14 April
ESA's Directorate of Human Spaceflight is inviting industrial, technology and scientific communities to provide inputs for experiments and payload elements for accommodation on its first lunar lander.
This Request for Information follows last year's ESA Council Meeting at Ministerial Level, where funding was approved for ESA to work towards launching a lunar lander in the 2017–20 timeframe within the European Transportation and Human Exploration Preparatory Activities programme and the Global Exploration Strategy (GES).
This mission builds on lunar exploration comparative architecture analysis studies recently conducted in cooperation with NASA. They helped to define the multiple and varied building blocks needed to return humans to the Moon, and to support a sustained presence there.
Key elements identified in these studies include:
The latter was identified by both ESA and NASA as a possible European contribution to a future international programme of lunar exploration and would take the form of a lunar Cargo Lander.
This Cargo Lander would deliver items such as food, water, oxygen, fuel and equipment to the Moon, in order to enable astronauts to stay for extended periods. It could also be useful during the construction of a permanent human lunar base.
In addition, ESA is also studying a precursor Lunar Lander mission, for which different mission options are under consideration, to develop and demonstrate the required capabilities. The primary goal is the advancement of European human exploration capabilities for contribution to the international lunar exploration effort. The mission also provides an opportunity to characterise the lunar environment and the landing site, as well as a platform for scientific research.
Request for Information
In order to ensure a robust mission definition and to draw on the wealth of relevant experience available, ESA invites the science, technology and industrial community (including non-space industries) to provide inputs to the project through a Request for Information (RFI).
In particular, ESA is interested in learning about technologies, instruments, techniques and experiments that could be accommodated on the Lunar Lander and are in keeping with the mission objectives:
These inputs will be used in the early design phases of the mission, in advance of a formal Announcement of Opportunity.
The RFI began on the Monday 2 March 2009 and remains open for six weeks until 10:00 CEST (08:00 UT) on Tuesday 14 April.
Further information on the RFI, including a concept submission template and the review and selection process, can be found in the Request for Information document (click to download pdf).
You can also download the Lunar Lander RFI Submission Template as a Word document.
Responses to the RFI should be sent to: explorationcall@esa.int.
For more information contact:
James Carpenter
Tel: +31 71 565 3540Email: James.Carpenter@esa.int
Adobe PDF Reader - Download