2008-09-18
https://www.esa.int/Education/Teachers_Corner/New_education_products_take_human_spaceflight_into_the_classroom
New education products take human spaceflight into the classroom
ESA has released a new educational DVD and a 3-D Teaching Tool, adding to the suite of human spaceflight related education products available for school teachers to use in the classroom.
New generation of DVDs
To keep abreast with current topics, ESA's Human Spaceflight Directorate is developing a new set of DVDs. Ingredients for Life: On Earth and in Space is the first DVD in this series.
'Ingredients for Life: On Earth and in Space' looks at the vital ingredients that terrestrial life relies on and make our planet such a beautiful and ideal place to live.
The DVD is divided into sections about the fundamental necessities for sustaining life on Earth, and how ESA is developing technologies to mimic these processes and systems in space for short and long periods of time.
The DVD is aimed at upper secondary school level students, aged 16-18.
Computer-based exercises
The ISS 3-D Teaching Tool is an interactive 'game-like' tool in which students work their way through several mission scenarios inside and outside the International Space Station, completing computer-based exercises related to the European curricula. This product provides teachers with a multilingual, pedagogical tool for teaching space-related topics to pupils aged 12-18.
Both products are translated into 12 ESA Member State languages and come complete with a Teacher's Guide and a User's Guide.
To get your copy
Teachers from one of ESA's Member State countries* can order a free copy of the DVD or the ISS 3D Teaching Tool (also available as a download for teachers and pupils) by completing the order form at http://esa-hme-education.org/.
IMPORTANT - read carefully before ordering:
For further information
Contact the Human Spaceflight education team by email at isseducationteam[@]esa.int.
* ESA Member States are Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.