2008-09-17
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Fly_your_picture_on_the_International_Space_Station
Fly your picture on the International Space Station
School children aged 6-12 are invited to take part in a competition to design a t-shirt for ESA astronaut Frank De Winne to wear during his mission to the International Space Station next year. The winner, and all their classmates, will get to talk to De Winne in space.
In May 2009, Frank De Winne, of Belgian nationality and a member of the European Astronaut Corps, will fly to the International Space Station. De Winne will spend 6 months on board the Station and will conduct scientific experiments developed by scientists from different countries worldwide.
He will also teach two lessons from space to children on the ground during his mission. On this occasion he will wear a very special t-shirt. The front of this t-shirt will bear a picture created by a European child who currently attends primary school.
You, maybe?
Any child aged from 6 to 12 who is a resident or national of any ESA Member State* in the school year 2008-2009 is invited to participate in the competition. The winning drawing will be printed on a t-shirt which De Winne will wear when giving a lesson from space.
The winner, together with their whole class, will have an opportunity to talk to Frank De Winne in space. Of course, the winner will be the first one to say "Hello", introduce his/her class and ask the first question. Make sure to tell your teacher that you are participating. ESA will help your teacher to organise the event.
How to participate
The drawing has to reflect the following themes:
Europe is exploring spaceHumans are explorers by nature. Achievements in space benefit life on Earth. Europe has a legacy in exploration. First it was the Earth and now it is Space.
In short: make sure that the drawing includes the elements which in some way symbolise or represent space and the Earth – the blue planet covered by water.
If you consider participating, note the following:
Competition rules
Submission address:
ESA/ESTEC/HSF-AP
'T-shirt drawing competition'
Keplerlaan 1
2201 AZ NoordwijkThe Netherlands
* Residents and nationals of the following states are allowed to participate in the competition: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.