2008-04-11
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/Take_part_in_the_Space_Station_Design_Workshop_2008
Take part in the Space Station Design Workshop 2008!
In July 2008, ESA will host the Space Station Design Workshop (SSDW) in collaboration with the Institute of Space Systems (Institut für Raumfahrtsysteme, IRS) of the Universitaet Stuttgart.
The SSDW provides an opportunity for the multidisciplinary conceptual design of space stations and other space infrastructures, in particular with interest towards human exploration of the Earth-Moon-Mars space. The workshop is intended to introduce students to conceptual design in a multinational, interactive, team-centred environment.
Two teams will compete against each other on a specific mission brief that will be released at the beginning of the workshop. The goal of the workshop is for students to do realistic work in space engineering, while also addressing other aspects related to space projects, such as architecture, economics and space law, as well as project and team management.
Students will use advanced design methodologies and software tools to achieve this goal. Students will receive guidance from IRS experts, and will also have the opportunity to speak with ESA experts on location.
When? Where?
The workshop will take place from 13 to 18 July 2008 at ESA’s space research and technology centre, ESTEC, in Noordwijk, the Netherlands.
Who can participate?
Participation is open to university students (up to Masters level or equivalent) from ESA Member States*. Addressed are particularly students at the end of their studies in engineering (aerospace, mechanical, electrical, etc.) but also students of other disciplines that are relevant for the conception and design of space stations and exploration missions.
Applicants must be proficient in English, show an interest in human spaceflight and exploration, and have the ability to work and communicate in an international team environment.
How to apply
Your application form, professor endorsement and CV must be submitted by no later than23 May 2008
Up to 30 students will be selected to participate. Selection will be based on the CV and letter of motivation, where the applicants should explain:
Those selected will be informed by latest 02 June 2008, and sent a final programme with details about the agenda, registration and accommodation.
Funding
The selected students will receive reimbursement for travel expenses (based on a threshold amount per country that shall be indicated on the registration site). Travel arrangements have to be made by the students. ESA will arrange and pay for accommodation in Noordwijk (on a shared room basis), as well as transport to and from ESTEC on a daily basis.
We explicitly advise that students arrange their own travel, medical and other personal insurances as this will not be covered by ESA.
More information
For more information about past SSDW and results, please take a look at: http://www.irs.uni-stuttgart.de/SSDW
If you have questions about the SSDW, its organisation, or space mission design in general, feel free to contact:ssdw-team@irs.uni-stuttgart.de
(*) ESA member states are; Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway,Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom