2007-09-21
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/ESA_launches_the_next_SUCCESS_Student_Contest
ESA launches the next SUCCESS Student Contest
Are you interested in a one-year paid internship at ESA's European Research and Technology Centre, ESTEC, in the Netherlands to work on your own experiment, and qualify it for flight to the International Space Station? Then read on...
About the contest
The SUCCESS Student Contest is a competition for European university students - up to the level of Masters or equivalent - to propose experiments that could be conducted on board the International Space Station (ISS).
Just imagine how the Space Station environment (e.g. weightlessness, the vacuum of outer space, the high altitude above the Earth, space radiation, the isolated environment for the astronauts...) could be relevant to your experiment idea and university research.
The goal of the competition is to make today's students the Space Station users of tomorrow!
The contest is open to university students and ESA expects proposals from a variety of engineering, technology and science disciplines.
How to participate
To take part, please describe your experiment idea in an essay of not more than 800 words. The essay must be submitted in English and uploaded electronically via the SUCCESS web page (http://www.esa.int/success) no later than 1 February 2008.
For the latest news about the contest and the different selection phases of the contest, please frequently visit the SUCCESS web site. The web site also contains information about previous SUCCESS contests with insights into the student experiments already flown on the ISS.
First prize and award ceremony
As mentioned above, the 1st prize winner will receive a one-year paid internship at ESTEC, to work on his/her experiment idea and prepare it for flight to the ISS.
The final award ceremony which will take place in the Spring 2009 (date and European location to be announced) after the second and final selection phases have been completed. All second-phase participants will also be invited to attend the ceremony and all contest participants will receive a certificate of participation.