2006-05-24
https://www.esa.int/About_Us/Business_with_ESA/Aurora_Industry_Day2
Aurora Industry Day
Industry representatives from Aurora Participating States* are invited to attend the Aurora Industry Day on 1 June 2006, at ESA's space technology centre, ESTEC, in Noordwijk, the Netherlands.
The half-day event will provide representatives from industry with an updated view of Europe's Aurora Exploration Programme, its milestones and detailed information about the upcoming opportunities.
Representatives from the Aurora Programme and Alcatel Alenia Space from Turin will present details about future activities and 'Invitations to Tender' (ITT) and will answer questions with the aim of enhancing mutual understanding and therefore facilitating the bidding process.
Following the Preparatory Phase between 2001 and 2005, the European Space Exploration Programme Aurora was approved at the last ESA Council at Ministerial level held in Berlin in December 2005. The Programme is made up of two major elements: a Core Programme and the first robotic Mission to Mars, ExoMars.
The Core Programme is devoted to further the preparation of the European space exploration framework, scenario and roadmaps and to the development of enabling capabilities as well as system designs for future exploration missions. The detailed Core Programme Work Plan is still subject to formal approval by the Aurora Programme’s Participating States, expected to occur at the end of May.
ExoMars will deploy a large rover on the surface of Mars in 2013 with a scientific payload searching for traces of life. The ExoMars mission is currently in its B1 Phase under the prime contractorship of Alcatel Alenia Spazio of Turin, Italy.
The date of the Aurora Industry Day has been chosen to take advantage of the ESA’s Industry Space Days that will be held at ESTEC on 29-31 May.
Participation to the Aurora Industry Day is free and you are just requested to register yourself on the Web at www.congrex.nl/06m29 (click on Registration & Hotel)
For further information:
Piero Messina
Aurora Exploration Programme
Piero.Messina@esa.intMobile: +33 6 87715126
* As of December 2005 the following ESA Member and Associated States participate in the Aurora Exploration Programme: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland