2006-03-07
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Business/Space_meets_biotechnology_at_BioSquare_2006
Space meets biotechnology at BioSquare 2006
ESA and the commercial arm of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory, EMBL Enterprise Management Technology Transfer GmbH (EMBLEM), will be present at BioSquare 2006 in Geneva, Switzerland, one of the most important biotechnology network events worldwide.
Through this cooperation, ESA and EMBLEM want to offer the Biotechnology Industry the knowledge and expertise to carry its visions to the next level and realise innovative research and development of the highest standards.
Alongside biotech hot subjects such as ‘Instrumentation in the area of Advanced Microscopy’ and ‘New compounds for cancer treatment’, EMBLEM will introduce, together with ESA, the unique opportunities that research in space has to offer the biotechnology community.
ESA is offering the biotechnology industry the opportunity to access the ISS and profit from its unique facilities by expanding their R&D and technologies through innovative research in weightlessness conditions.
ESA has a vast experience in space research for biotechnology. Understanding the role of gravity at molecular and cellular level plays a key role in understanding the related processes and thus being able to control and exploit them. Research in the weightlessness environment of the International Space Station, the world’s only state-of-the-art orbital laboratory, can shed light on issues such as cell growth and differentiation, which potentially can be used in fields such as molecular medicine and drug development.
Together with EMBLEM, ESA will promote this opportunity to a broad audience of potential customers and key players in the Life Sciences Industry.
ESA and EMBLEM will be supported on the stand by the Biotechnology Space Support Centre ‘Biotesc’. Biotesc is part of the Swiss ‘Space Biology Group’ at the ETH-Zurich, an established centre for the study of spaceflight influence on physiological processes of cells, and ISS Lab Ruhr GmbH, which heads ESA’s Commercial Agent Network. This Network was established to promote, market and sell the use of European research facilities on board the ISS to companies from the biotechnology, health, food and nutrition market sectors throughout Europe.
The ESA booth at BioSquare, which takes place from 8 to 10 March, can be found at the International Conference Centre Geneva, area R4.
For more information, please contact:
Frank Salzgeber
Head of Commercial Development of ESA’s Commercial Promotion Office
Directorate of Human Spaceflight, Microgravity and Exploration
Noordwijk (The Netherlands)
Tel: +31 71 565 3910Fax: +31 71 565 5232