2006-01-10
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/New_ISS_Education_Kit_for_primary_schools
New ISS Education Kit for primary schools
ESA has produced a binder for primary school teachers who are eager to use space as a motivating tool for teaching subjects ranging from science to art. Teachers throughout the ESA Member States, who teach pupils aged 8-12, are invited to register for a free copy of the International Space Station Education Kit for primary schools.
The new primary school kit complements ESA's ISS Education Kit for secondary schools, available since February 2004, which is aimed at teachers at lower secondary level (ages 12-15).
To ensure that topics covered are common to all European curricula, ESA's ISS Education products are produced in cooperation with teachers from all over Europe – and the primary kit is no exception. In August 2004, material written for the kit was assessed during a workshop at the Glasgow Science Centre, in Scotland. Teachers from five ESA Member States gathered for four days of intensive scrutiny and discussion. Their advice has contributed to the final version of the ISS Education Kit for primary schools.
Content
The A4-sized binder contains four chapters devoted to explaining various aspects of life in space and what is it like to live and work on board the International Space Station. Each chapter contains background information, worksheets and a teacher’s guide. A glossary and colour posters complete the content.
The kit can be used as the basis for classroom lessons; for group exercises; or to be given out as homework. Individual pages can be photocopied and distributed to each pupil.
For now the ISS Education Kit for primary schools is available in English only. In 2006 the kit will be translated into all 11 ESA Member State languages.
To get your copy
If you are a teacher at a school in one of the 17 ESA Member States*, and you teach pupils aged 8-10; you can receive a copy of the kit. Follow the link below to order your free copy.
IMPORTANT - read carefully before ordering:
ISS Education Kit for primary schools - request form »»
* ESA Member States are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.