2005-03-24
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/International_Space_Station/Back_to_the_future_countdown_to_Shuttle_return_to_flight
"Back to the future": countdown to Shuttle return to flight
ESA PR 16-2005. Launch pad 39B at Kennedy Space Center in Florida will soon see the Shuttle blasting off again for a new exciting mission in space. According to NASA’s current schedule, this will be between 15 May and 3 June (the precise date will be set once the flight readiness review process has been completed at the end of April).
The success of this mission will secure the future of the International Space Station (ISS), as the Shuttle is the only spacecraft capable of transporting new modules from the USA, Europe and Japan to continue its construction. ESA needs the Shuttle to deliver its Columbus laboratory to the ISS, where it will enable international crews to conduct a variety of experiments in material sciences, medicine, biology and technology.
Through the nationally-funded European Soyuz missions with ESA astronauts to the ISS, today Europe has become the largest scientific user of the Space Station, while ESA has developed sophisticated multi-purpose experimental facilities for the Columbus laboratory to further enhance the ISS utilisation programme.
Since the Columbia accident on 1 February 2003, NASA has made steady progress in addressing key safety issues and preparing the Shuttle fleet for spaceflight. Improvements include:
The seven-strong Discovery crew will fly to the ISS to test and evaluate the new technologies and procedures for Shuttle inspection and in-orbit repair. The crew are: Commander Eileen Collins - this is only the second ever Shuttle mission headed by a woman - Pilot James Kelly, Mission Specialists Soichi Noguchi from Japan, Steve Robinson, Andy Thomas, Wendy Lawrence and Charles Camarda.
Steve Robinson and Soichi Noguchi will make three spacewalks outside the Shuttle. STS-114 will be the third trip to the ISS for the European-built multi-purpose logistics module (MPLM), now named "Raffaello". It’s essentially a "removal van" that transports supplies to the Station. Raffaello will deliver consumables and supplies, notably food, water and air, and of particular interest to the media, batteries and a photo and TV resupply kit with new camera lenses and videotapes.
Twelve days after lift-off, Discovery is scheduled to re-enter the atmosphere and land at the Kennedy Space Center.
Successful completion of this flight will open the door to further missions by ESA astronauts to the ISS. With the Shuttle's return to flight, the size of the permanent expedition crews on the ISS can be brought back to three, leading to resumption of the full experimental programme. In 2006 ESA’s unmanned Automatic Transfer Vehicle (ATV) will make its maiden flight, having been put into orbit by an Ariane 5 launcher, carrying equipment, propellant, food, water and air for the crew on board the ISS, after which it will be performing similar missions every 12 to 18 months.
Return to flight media accreditation
Media representatives wishing to obtain Kennedy Space Center (KSC) credentials for NASA's Space Shuttle return to flight mission (STS-114) can submit requests via the new online accreditation website at:
https://media.ksc.nasa.gov
Non-US citizens must submit requests at least two weeks prior to events. Access is granted on a first-come first-served basis.
The following strict accreditation deadline applies: 22 April 2005 for the STS-114 launch during the 15 May to 3 June launch window. Requests filed after that date will not be considered.
Once accreditation is approved, media will receive confirmation via e-mail. Badges will be available for collection from 19 April. Credentials will be honoured for the terminal countdown demonstration test through to STS-114 landing. News organisations will be limited to minimal numbers for Shuttle launch day activities.
Media with special logistic needs or requests, such as space for production or administration trucks, electrical connections or workstations in the newsroom, should contact Kandy Warren (kandy.t.warren@nasa.gov) by 15 April. Production space in the press area is provided on a first-come first-served basis.
Media wishing to set up temporary telephone, fax, ISDN or network lines should make arrangements with the US telephone company Bell South at: +1 800 213 4988. Media must have an assigned seat in the KSC newsroom prior to setting up lines. Media are required to have a NASA public affairs escort to access any area at KSC, except the Launch Complex 39 cafeteria. For the latest information on NASA's return to flight, visit:
http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight
European media coverage Media can also follow the STS-114 mission from Europe at the Erasmus User Centre for the International Space Station, located at ESA's ESTEC establishment in Noordwijk, the Netherlands. The Erasmus User Centre receives data, images and video from the ISS and has the capability to receive NASA Television via satellite or teleconference lines. The Centre also features a newsroom with computer workstations for the media, a television recording studio and a satellite TV broadcast facility, so that media can conduct and broadcast live interviews with ESA staff without the need to bring in their own production equipment and support staff.
For further media information please contact:
Franco Bonacina
ESA Communication Department
Paris (France)
Tel: +33 1 5369 7155Fax: +33 1 5369 7690
Dieter Isakeit
Erasmus User Centre and Communication Office
Directorate of Human Spaceflight, Microgravity and Exploration
Noordwijk (the Netherlands)
Tel: +31 71 565 5451
Fax: +31 71 565 8008e-mail: dieter.isakeit@esa.int