2004-09-24
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Astronauts/ESA_at_the_International_Astronautical_Congress_in_Vancouver
ESA at the International Astronautical Congress in Vancouver
ESA PR 53-2004. Vancouver, Canada, hosts the 55th International Astronautical Congress (IAC) from 4 to 8 October this year. The Congress is being organised by the International Astronautical Federation (IAF) together with the International Academy of Astronautics (IAA) and the International Institute of Space law (IISL).
Under the title 'Infinite Possibilities/Global Realities', the Congress, which dates back to 1950 and is being held in Canada for the second time, aims to bring together researchers, scientists, engineers, managers, users and students involved in space activities and related fields. The 55th IAC will be attended by world experts in space disciplines from space agencies, research institutes, universities and industry, sharing and debating results, studies, projects and visions for the future in space.
ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain will be leading an ESA delegation attending the Congress, comprising several specialists in disciplines ranging from space sciences to future space exploration and space law.
This Congress also marks 25 years of cooperation between ESA and Canada. “Europe and Canada have built a space bridge across the Atlantic through cooperation in space”, said Jean-Jacques Dordain. “ESA and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) are already strong partners in key technologies for telecommunications and Earth observation, besides being partners in the International Space Station, and I am confident they are committed to continue pursuing this fruitful cooperation in new international endeavours such as the future Space Exploration programme”, he added.
On 5 October, Jean-Jacques Dordain and Canadian Space Agency President Marc Garneau will hold a press conference to mark the 25th anniversary of ESA/Canada cooperation, at the ESA stand (508) in the Vancouver Convention & Exhibition Centre, Halls A & B, starting at 11:30.
An ESA exhibit will highlight the Agency's various programmes for Congress participants and visitors. Over a hundred European university students and students from developing countries which cooperate with ESA will be able to attend the Congress thanks to a contribution from ESA, making a total delegation of more than 150 students from around the world, as part of the process of “handing down” space expertise to the coming generation of space scientists, engineers and leaders.
The complete programme of the Congress can be found at: www.iac2004.ca
For further information, please contact:
ESA Media RelationsTel. + 33 1 5369 7155
or:
Clare Mattok
ESA Communication DepartmentTel. + 33 1 5369 7412
Or:
Jean-Charles Bigot
ESA International Relations DepartmentTel. + 33 1 5369 7738