2003-09-25
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/Euro_from_Space_a_unique_opportunity_to_support_the_ISS_Education_Programme
Euro from Space – a unique opportunity to support the ISS Education Programme
On 28 August 2003, Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne presented the first initiative to raise money for the ISS Education Fund: the Euro from Space initiative. ESA has set up this unique initiative in cooperation with the European Central Bank.
In October 2002, Frank De Winne spent eight days on board the International Space Station (ISS) during the Belgian Odissea Mission, a Soyuz mission which was funded by the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office. Together with an intensive scientific programme of more than 20 experiments, De Winne carried a package of three complete sets of Euro banknotes and 15 complete national sets of Euro coins provided by the European Central Bank (ECB).
“The future belongs to knowledge-based societies”, explains Jörg Feustel-Büechl, Director of the ESA Human Spaceflight Directorate. “Fully aware of this ESA spends a considerable amount on education. The first Euro sets, which flew into space, are unique symbols of the importance for Europe to further invest money into the education of its youth.”
Previously signed by the President of the ECB, Willem F. Duisenberg, the banknotes were taken into space and stamped by Frank De Winne on board the Space Station. The banknotes now carry the official ISS and the Odissea mission stamps.
ESA and the ECB will be awarding these 18 unique space euro sets for the highest financial donations to the ISS Education Fund. The three highest donors will receive one set of Euro banknotes. Each set contains seven banknotes of 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, and 500 Euro nominal value; the next 15 highest donors will receive one set of Euro coins. Each set contains eight coins of the value of 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 cent and 1 and 2 Euro. The coins will be distributed according to their country of origin in the following order: Vatican State, Monaco, San Marino, Ireland, Finland, Portugal, Belgium Luxembourg, Netherlands, Austria, Greece, Spain, Germany, Italy, France.
ESA astronaut Frank De Winne says, “I am honoured to be a part of this initiative, which contributes to helping students to develop their knowledge of space activities and to build the European space of the future.”
Starting from Monday 20 October 2003, donations will be accepted to bid for the three very special sets of Euro banknotes and 15 national sets of Euro coins: All of them have flown on board the ISS during ESA’s Odissea mission in October 2002.
Please see the attached rules and form for the Euro from Space initiative:
Euro from Space initiative - donation rulesEuro from Space initiative - donation form
Contact:
Elena Lippi
Directorate of Human Spaceflight
European Space Agency
Noordwijk (The Netherlands)
Phone: +31 71 565 3163
Fax: +31 71 565 5232E-mail: Eurofromspace@esa.int