2003-07-25
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/Sign_up_now_for_new_ISS_Education_Kit
Sign up now for new ISS Education Kit
Starting in the autumn ESA will distribute the new International Space Station Education Kit for pupils aged 12-15. Teachers, you can sign up now for a free copy and be in with the chance of hosting a launch event for the kit at your school!
Developed with input from teachers, piloted in early 2003 and improved as a result of feedback, the new ISS Education Kit is currently in production. 40 000 copies will be printed in no less than 11 languages and distributed to interested teachers in all 15 ESA Member States* later this year. The kit is aimed at teachers of secondary school pupils aged 12-15 years old ( International Standard Classification for Education - level 2).
Launch event at your school
Kits will be rolled out at launch events across Europe during the latter part of this year. ESA's astronauts will play a leading role in promoting the kits, starting with Pedro Duque's tour of Spain after his Soyuz flight to ISS in October.
If you would like your school to be considered for a launch event - with the possibility of having an astronaut present - sign up for a kit and tell us why you would like us to choose your school.
Contents of the kit
Five chapters explain various aspects of ISS, including what it is, how it is being built, what it is like to live and work on board, and what future voyages will be like. There are also related inter-disciplinary exercises, a teacher's guide, a glossary and colour overhead transparencies.
Modules can be taught in the classroom, used to facilitate group exercises, given as homework, or copied and distributed to each pupil.
To get your copy
If you are a teacher at a school in one of the 15 ESA Member States*, and you teach pupils aged 12-15, you can receive a copy of the kit. Please complete the ISS Education Kit request form.
Don't forget to tell us if you would like your school to be considered for a launch event! - contact us via email at educationkit@esa.int
Downloads
The ISS Education Kit is also available as a download in pdf format, click here for the downloads page »»
* ESA Member States are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.