14/10/2018
Call for media: Space for Inspiration conference
Media are invited to the second edition of ‘Space for Inspiration’, an international conference organised by the European Space Agency for everyone curious about space exploration and why it matters. The event takes place in Bilbao, Spain, 29–31 October, and focuses on how space can be a powerful instrument for positive change and new businesses on planet Earth. This year’s theme ­is ‘Living in our universe’.
The two-day conference will be packed with thought-provoking talks, ground-breaking research and interactive experiences. A vibrant speaker line-up will bring together tech-industry visionaries, policy makers and investors. Ideas to boost space exploration range from artificial intelligence and smart materials to virtual reality and automation.
“Europe is ready to inspire and bring more business into orbit. We are opening the door to bold companies and research communities to join a new space exploration era,” says David Parker, ESA Director of Human and Robotic Exploration.
Participants will learn about the emerging market for commercial applications not far from Earth and how to improve their company performance in times of change.
From lunar business to exploring life in the Universe, media can learn about how space exploration brings benefits to our planet.
During the event the winners of the Space Exploration Masters competition will be announced. The competition encourages ideas to solve some of the space industry’s main challenges and the best products and services with commercial potential.
Start-ups, entrepreneurs, and research teams have tackled the challenges in human and robotic missions, resources, space tourism and more. This year’s competition partnered with the United Nations World Health Organisation to target health and food.
Programme highlights
The event combines plenary sessions with interactive workshops and inspirational talks.
Monday, 29 October
18:00                   Registration opens
19:00                   Opening of exhibition “Space Avenues”
19:30                   Opening talk by ESA astronaut Paolo Nespoli:                            “Stories from space: an astronaut’s view”
Tuesday, 30 October
09:00-18:00         Business opportunities day
‘Designathon’ children’s competition – Best Space Inventor
18:15                   Space Exploration Masters – Awards ceremony20:00                   Dine and discuss
Wednesday, 31 October09:00-17:15         Innovation and technology day
More on Space for InspirationThe full programme and a list of speakers is available at http://space4inspiration.esa.int/
LocationSpace for Inspiration will be held at the Euskalduna conference centre in Bilbao, Spain. Address: Abandoibarra Avenue 4, 48011.
Paolo Nespoli’s opening talk will take place at the University of the Basque Country. Address: Abandoibarra Avenue 3, 48009, Bizkaia Aretoa, Mitxelena auditorium.
Media accreditationMedia representatives with press or social media credentials are invited to register for all the sessions and social events throughout the conference at https://atpi.eventsair.com/space-for-inspiration/press-registration
If you wish to attend the pre-conference event at the University of the Basque Country with ESA astronaut Paolo Nespoli, please register at https://www.ehu.eus/es/komunikazio-bulegoa/harremanetarako
Media contactsFor further information and interview requests please contact:
ESA Media Relations Office
Email: media@esa.intTel: +33 1 53 69 72 99
ESA/ESAC Communication Office, Spain
Tel: +34 91 81 31 359Email: comunicacionesac@esa.int