2002-04-19
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Take_a_Space_Walk_at_ILA_in_Berlin
Take a "Space Walk" at ILA in Berlin
ESA PR 29-2002. The ILA 2002 international aerospace exhibition takes place between Monday 6 and Sunday 12 May at Berlin Schoenefeld Airport.
As in the past ESA, DLR (the German Space Agency) and the German space industry, under the umbrella of BDLI (German Aerospace Industries Association), will be present for trade visitors and the general public with an impressive exhibition in Hall 2.
1600 square metres of European space activities ranging from space science, Earth observation, telecommunications, satellite navigation, launchers, the International Space Station to industrial matters and technology programmes.
Activities for the media, the trade and the general public
To address the media, the trade and the general public, a stage set up in the Space Hall will host various kinds of presentations/events throughout the week.
Media activities
On 3 May, a few days before the opening of ILA, the media are invited to attend a press conference starting at 09:30 at the Ministry of Education and Research in Berlin with Mrs Edelgard Bulmahn, Minister for Education and Research and Chair of the ESA Ministerial Council, Antonio Rodotà, Director General of ESA, and Sigmar Wittig, Chairman of the Executive Board of DLR. For further information on this event call Florian Frank, Ministry of Education and Research, Berlin, tel. +49 30 28540 5322.
From Monday 6 May, the opening day, interviews with ESA directors, top management, programme specialists and astronauts can be arranged throughout the week at the Space Hall. To book your interview opportunity, please complete the attached form and return it by Monday 29 April 2002 at the latest.
Activities for trade visitors and the media
On the afternoon of Monday 6 May (opening day) at 14:30, the German Chancellor will officially open ILA in Hall 3 and will later visit the Space Hall (15:35-15:50).
In the morning of Tuesday 7 May, a group of Ambassadors resident in Berlin will visit the Space Hall. ESA, DLR and industry representatives will give short presentations. On the afternoon of 7 May, from 14:00 to 16:00 hrs, a symposium on the International Space Station will be held. An interesting opportunity for the media to take stock of the current situation with the ISS and to learn more about commercialisation of the Station.
A presentation with members of the European Astronaut Corps will take place between 16:00 and 17:00 hrs.
In the evening (from 19:00 hrs) a brand new film production on the International Space Station will be screened in two IMAX theatres in central Berlin.
On Wednesday 8 May (11:00-13:00), ESA and industry specialists will hold a debate on relations between the space industry and ESA for the trade and the media.
Stage presentations for the general public and the media
From Thursday 9 May (first public day) to Sunday 12 May, the stage will host two series of presentations lasting one hour each, one in the morning and one in the afternoon. Each series will cover subjects such as satellite navigation, Earth observation, launchers, human spaceflight and microgravity, space science and astronauts. A professional anchorman will conduct the presentations on stage.
3D TV
Twice a day whenever possible (once in the morning and once in the afternoon) a special video link will be set up between ASTRIUM/Bremen, where ESA's Columbus module for the International Space Station is being integrated, and the Space Hall at ILA. The video transmission will be produced in three-dimensional format. The 3D effect is perceived by wearing special glasses when watching standard TV monitors or the projection screen.
Programme managers in Bremen will take remote visitors at the Space Hall through a guided tour of the real Columbus module and reply to questions from the public. ESA specialists and a professional anchorman will conduct the event.
For further information, please contact:
ESA Media Relations
Tel. + 33 1 5369 7155Fax. + 33 1 5369 7690