2002-03-19
https://www.esa.int/About_Us/Business_with_ESA/European_and_Canadian_space_agencies_announce_communications_contract_for_International_Space_Station
European and Canadian space agencies announce communications contract for International Space Station
The European Space Agency (ESA) and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) have announced a call to communication companies who are interested in undertaking a contract for brand communication services related to the International Space Station (ISS).
The contract is a significant move for ESA and CSA who want to heighten the profile of the ISS within Europe and Canada to help meet the commercial objectives of the Space Station.
The two organisations want to hear expressions of interest from communication companies with a major office based in one of the European ISS participating countries* and who are able to demonstrate their geographical coverage across Europe. In addition, one of the essential requirements for the agency would be to have an office or affiliate in Canada. The Call for Interest document, which outlines the scope of work and the requirements needed from a communication agency, can be downloaded from the following url:https://esamultimedia.esa.int/docs/communicationsCFI.pdf
The ISS is the largest space science and technology venture ever undertaken in human history. It is a co-operative programme between Europe, Canada, the United States, Russia, and Japan for the joint development, operation and utilisation of a permanently inhabited space station in low Earth orbit. The ISS provides access to traditional scientific users sponsored by governments wishing to carry out space based research but in addition the ISS partners have agreed on promoting the use of the ISS by commercial users, both in the research field and non-research related areas.
Maurizio Belingheri, Head of ISS Commercialisation division at ESA says, “This initiative represents a significant and unique opportunity for a communications company to work with ESA and CSA in this major venture. The eyes of the world will be on the Station as it develops and contributes to society. In the past, manned space flight systems have offered few opportunities for commercial use outside of the space industry. But the ISS is set to change this pattern now that it is open for business.”
* ISS participating countries in Europe: Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Switzerland, Spain, Denmark, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden
Click here for CFI ISS Commercial Communications and Promotion Questions & Answers
To all the interested parties:
Note: the deadline for submission of replies has been postponed to Wednesday 17 April, 2002.