2001-03-30
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/An_invitation_to_European_teachers
An invitation to European teachers
'Space' is not only about science, it is a vision, a subject without boundaries. ESA, in the framework of the International Space Station Programme, is inviting European teachers to take part in a Space Conference later this year, focusing on space education from 6-18 years. To help us understand your teaching needs, we’d like your help.
Space science and Space applications have penetrated almost every aspect of life on earth ranging from weather forecasts or telecommunication to knowledge about the development of our universe itself. At the same time 'Space' as a subject within teaching can be used to inspire and motivate young people across a variety of subject areas. Traditionally, space is associated with science like physics and astronomy but space also influences numerous other fields like biology, geography and geology. As a subject it could be used in literature, history or even art classes - 'space' is not only about science, it is a vision, a subject without boundaries.
The European Space Agency (ESA), in the framework of the International Space Station (ISS) programme, plans to organise a conference specifically for teachers later this year, which will focus on space education for 6-18 year olds. We want this conference to be a forum whereby we work closely with teachers across Europe from all disciplines.
To ensure that we understand your teaching needs and to help us in the preparation of a conference reflecting those needs it would be very much appreciated if you would take 5 minutes to complete the questionnaire: http://www.esa.int/Questionnaire.html.
Please complete this questionnaire before 19 April 2001.
We will be inviting a sample of teachers who complete this questionnaire to participate in the conference planning workshop, all expenses paid, at ESTEC based in Noordwijk, The Netherlands on 1 May 2001. The workshop will help to ensure that the event meets the needs of teachers.