2020-11-04
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Exploration/ExoMars/Exomars_modules_reunited
Exomars modules reunited
The Rosalind Franklin ExoMars rover has been reunited with the Kazachok surface platform, carrier module and descent module in Cannes, France.
All but the rover shipped in late September  from the Thales Alenia Space facilities in Turin, Italy, with the rover joining last week. The rover has now successfully passed a ‘health check’ following the transport between sites, and is being prepared to be integrated with Kazachok, for interface and combined functional tests.
Subsequent tests will include electromagnetic compatibility checks, which not only confirm that the electronics within the craft function correctly but also that there is no interference between the different units operating at the same time. Balance tests of the various elements of the entire spacecraft composite – also including the descent and carrier modules – will confirm expected values for centre of mass and moment of inertia, necessary to ensure correct guidance and control throughout the launch, cruise and entry and descent phases.
Later, ESA’s Spacecraft Operations Centre (ESOC) in Darmstadt, Germany will verify the ground capabilities of commanding Kazachok and will also check the surface platform interfaces with Rosalind Franklin by sending rover commands prepared by the Rover Operations Control Centre (ROCC) in Turin.
In parallel this month, work also progresses at the ROCC to verify the commanding process during mission surface operations with the so-called ‘Ground Test Model’ of the rover. During the first sols on Mars, before Rosalind Franklin moves off the landing platform, the rover will be commanded via the platform from ESOC. Once the rover’s wheels are on martian soil to begin its mission, science operations will be managed directly from the ROCC. The ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter, at Mars since 2016 and operated from ESOC, will act as data relay between Earth and Mars. The ground model operated at the ROCC Mars Terrain Simulator will play a key role in supporting the training of the operators and scientists as they prepare for Rosalind Franklin’s mission on Mars in 2023. It will also be used to validate rover complex activities, and to test any non-routine commands before uploading them to the rover.
The ExoMars programme is a joint endeavour between ESA and the Russian State Space Corporation, Roscosmos.