2020-09-17
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/ESA_s_first_online_space_physician_training_course_opens_for_applications
ESA's first online space physician training course opens for applications
Applications for the Online SPTC 2021 have closed, but there are plans for this programme to be repeated in the future. A new announcement will be made here in due course.
Applications have now closed for ESA’s next Space Physician Training Course, scheduled to take place online from 21-22 January 2021.
It is the first time the annual course will be held in digital format, providing an opportunity for qualified physicians to gain an insight into space medicine as practiced at the European Astronaut Centre (EAC) in Cologne, Germany.
The course is part of a portfolio of educational activities offered by ESA to prepare people, including medical doctors, for potential careers in space medicine and related research. Key topics include the challenges and opportunities physicians will face in support of exploration and commercial spaceflight in the exciting years ahead.
During the two-day programme, participants will attend virtual presentations given by ESA’s leading experts on the realities of space medicine and its operational practice in supporting ESA astronauts’ health and wellbeing before, during and after their missions to space.
ESA flight surgeons and other members of the space medicine team will cover areas ranging from the challenges of the space environment and the physiological consequences it has on the human body, to countermeasures that are currently being used or developed. Insights into the vital roles of biomedical engineers, European communicators (Eurocoms) who speak with astronauts on Station, and the exercise countermeasures team will also be provided.
Apply now
Though the course cannot be held face-to-face due to COVID-19 restrictions, the team is hopeful the new online format will make education even more accessible to qualified physicians. Each lecture will provide plenty of time for questions at the end, giving participants the opportunity to engage with experts and gain as much knowledge as they would onsite.
Applications for the Online SPTC 2021 have closed, but there are plans for this programme to be repeated in the future. A new announcement will be made here in due course.