2013-03-05
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/ESA_Summer_Workshop_for_Teachers_2013
ESA Summer Workshop for Teachers 2013
This year ESA is organising the 4th summer workshop for science teachers of students between 14 and 18 years of age. The workshop will be held at ESA’s European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), located in Noordwijk, the Netherlands, from 20 to 23 August 2013. During this workshop, participants will be presented with innovative and inspiring ways to use space as a means for engaging students with Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) related subjects. In addition to networking with their peers from across Europe, participants will have the opportunity to gain new skills that will enhance their teaching methods and refresh existing lessons. It is a unique opportunity to develop new skills and network with teachers from across Europe.
Who can apply?
The workshop is open to teachers of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects in secondary schools (students 14 - 18 years old) of ESA Member and Cooperating States*. Please note that priority will be given to persons who have not participated in previous ESA teachers workshops.
How and when to apply?
A limited number of places are available at the Summer Workshop for Teachers. Teachers wishing to participate in the workshop should complete the online application form. As part of the application process teachers need to briefly describe why they would like to attend the workshop and how they plan to disseminate the knowledge gained including ESA’s education resources.
The deadline for applications is 21 May 2013, 12:00 CET (11:00 GMT).
Workshop details:
The workshop takes place at ESTEC, ESA’s establishment in the Netherlands, located in Noordwijk. The workshop will begin at 10:00 on Tuesday 20 August 2013 and finish at 16:00 on Friday 23 August 2013.
The working language of the workshop will be English; participants must have a sufficient command of the language to be able to fully participate in the hands-on activities.
Attendance to the entire workshop is mandatory. Participants are encouraged to bring their personal laptops. Internet access will be organised on location.
Successful applicants will be informed that they have secured a place at the workshop on or before 31 May 2013.
What to expect?
As a taster of what this workshop will be like, you can watch below a session given last year by Anu Ojha, Director of the National Space Academy in the UK. He used comets as a hook to bring space into geography, physics, chemistry and mathematics classes.
Terms of participation:
Teachers applying to attend the workshop agree that, if selected, they will carry out all the activities listed below, following their participation.
Sponsorship and costs:
There is no workshop participation fee. ESA will arrange and sponsor the costs of hotel accommodation, local transport, lunches and refreshments for all selected participants during the workshop, as well as one social dinner.
Participants are expected to cover the costs of their travel to and from the Netherlands and the cost of evening meals, with the exception of the social dinner.
*ESA Member States at the beginning of 2013: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.