2004-11-05
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/ISS_Education_Kit_now_available_in_eleven_languages
ISS Education Kit now available in eleven languages
First released in English over a year ago, the International Space Station (ISS) Education Kit is now available in eleven European languages. Schoolteachers throughout the ESA Member State countries, who teach pupils aged 12-15, are invited to register for a free copy of the kit in the language of their choice.
The ISS Education Kit has been developed to support teachers who are eager to use space as a motivating tool for teaching and want to use elements of today’s space science and technology to capture the interest among their students.
After an initial release in English, the kit has now been translated into Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish.
Target groups and content
The ISS Education Kit targets teachers throughout Europe and their students aged 12–15. It uses the International Space Station as a context to teach a variety of subjects by introducing exercises in biology, maths, and chemistry as well as social science and art – all related to the life and work of astronauts on board the ISS.
The ISS Education Kit is presented in an A4 folder and contains five chapters, including suggestions for classroom activities and relevant background information, colour overhead transparencies, a glossary and a teacher’s guide.
To get your copy
If you are a teacher at a school in one of the 17 ESA Member States*, and you teach pupils aged 12-15; you can receive a copy of the kit.
IMPORTANT - read carefully before ordering:
The ISS Education Kit is available in the following languages: Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish. N.B. The Spanish version is no longer available - you can order a different language or download the Spanish pdf files.
Please complete the ISS Education Kit request form. N.B. The amount of requests received for our materials is beyond our expectations. Besides thanking you for your enthusiasm for our work, we would like to ask you for a little bit patience. A backlog of orders will be sent out in October.
Downloads
The ISS Education Kit is also available as a download in pdf format, click here for the downloads page »»
* ESA Member States are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.