2004-08-04
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/European_teachers_collaborate_with_ESA_in_development_of_Primary-level_ISS_Education_Kit
European teachers collaborate with ESA in development of Primary-level ISS Education Kit
ESA recently ran a workshop at the Glasgow Science Centre, in Scotland, to assess the material written for the forthcoming Primary-level ISS Education Kit. Teachers from five ESA Member States gathered for four days of intensive scrutiny and discussion. Their advice will contribute to the final version of the ISS Education Kit for pupils aged 8-10.
Teachers
Among the teachers were former participants of Teach Space 2003 – a previous ESA education workshop - as well as individuals with no prior involvement in ESA. This mixed group allowed ESA to get fresh ideas and to check that the advice given by participants of the Teach Space 2003 workshop has been adhered to.
Surrounded by educational experiments and with the target group close at hand, the Glasgow Science Centre proved a truly inspirational environment.
Workshop
The workshop started with an introduction to ESA's education programmes, to the ISS Education Programme, and to the International Space Station itself. A presentation was also given about the Glasgow Science Centre Education Programme.
The teachers worked in two teams during the workshop - reading, discussing and giving advice on each chapter. Layout and other issues were also discussed. The final day was used to exchange general impressions and recommendations, and to give suggestions for improvement.
Collaboration
The participants were strongly motivated and were keen to continue the collaboration with ESA, offering to give further advice and feedback. Over the next month ESA will analyse the inputs given by the teachers, using them to update and improve the Primary-level ISS Education Kit. All inputs given were greatly appreciated.
ESA is always keen to hear from teachers who are willing to help us develop new material: if you would like to be added to our database for future events/inputs, please send an email to: Barbara.ten.Berge@esa.int
Pre-register for your copy
Distribution of the English version of the Primary-level ISS Education Kit is planned for the end of 2004. In 2005 the kit will be translated into all 11 languages of the ESA Member States*. To pre-register for your copy of the Primary-level ISS Education Kit, send an email to Barbara.ten.Berge@esa.int
* ESA Member States are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.