2004-05-12
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/New_members_join_the_ISS_Education_Fund
New members join the ISS Education Fund
From across Europe, organisations are increasingly recognising the importance of stimulating the interest of young people in science. In recent months, another five organisations have pledged their support to the ISS Education Fund and are directly contributing to the production and dissemination of a unique range of high-quality teaching aids that use space as a tool.
Companies in Spain, Germany, and Northern Ireland, have joined the ISS Education Fund's most recent member – the European Astronaut Corps – to support the work of ESA’s ISS Education Programme.
From Northern Ireland, Armagh Planetarium led the way: this world-renowned astronomical educational establishment brings astronomy and related sciences to a wide audience, and acts as a focal point for government, local businesses, and education organisations across Northern Ireland to benefit from space and spin-off technologies.
Action Renewables became the second member from Northern Ireland. It aims to stimulate awareness of the issues associated with conventional energy use and of the technologies and alternative solutions available through renewable energy technologies.
The high-technology consultancy company, Eurospace - active across Germany in sectors such as automotive, transportation, aeronautics and space - recently realised the marketing and PR benefits of supporting the Fund.
They are joined by the Spanish software solutions developer, Oasyssoft, a market-leader in Spanish website creation tools with their eBD platform; yet another organisation committed to the Fund.
All of these companies have realised that they can enjoy a variety of benefits – from marketing and PR, to networking, and enhanced access to the people and facilities of the European Space Agency – while actively contributing to enhancing an understanding and interest in science among young people through supporting the Fund.
If you would like to join this growing organisation, contact Fiona.Wilson@esa.int, call 00 31 71 565 6042, or go to http://www.esa.int/issef. Together we can make a difference – be part of it today: the ISS Education Fund – contributing to Europe’s future.