2004-04-08
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/Astronauts_become_newest_members_of_ISS_Education_Fund
Astronauts become newest members of ISS Education Fund
The European Astronaut Corps became the newest – and certainly the most high-flying – members of the ISS Education Fund in a ceremony held on 30 March at ESA's European Astronaut Centre (EAC) in Cologne, Germany.
Michel Tognini, Head of the Astronaut Division, handed over the astronauts' contribution to Elena Grifoni, Head of ISS Utilisation Strategy & Education, stating that the European astronauts had always recognised the value of education and were proud of their role in helping motivate young people to study.
Since the ISS Education Fund directly supports ESA's ISS Education Programme, the astronauts decided it was a logical step for them to contribute financially. The involvement of the astronauts marks the second time the Fund has been linked with EAC: in August of last year the Fund was officially launched in Cologne.
The hand-over took place in the presence of ESA's Director General, Jean-Jacques Dordain, and ESA's Director of Human Spaceflight, Jörg Feustel-Büechl, as well as EAC staff, and invited guests.
The Fund already has the support of a number of prestigious organisations and individuals, and the European Astronaut Corps is joined by a further three new participating companies from Spain, Germany, and Northern Ireland all of whom pledged their support to the Fund in March 2004.
Join the astronauts: Be part of the ISS Education Fund
Companies, and individuals, throughout Europe are invited to help support the ISS Education Programme, which is creating and distributing education products about space, free of charge to schools within ESA's 15 Member States throughout Europe.
The Programme aims to use the natural interest of young people in space to stimulate their interest and understanding in science. Companies enjoy a variety of benefits from being part of the Fund, including the awareness that they are contributing to the knowledge of young people. If you would like to see how you could be involved visit our website at http://www.esa.int/issef or contact Fiona.Wilson@esa.int.