views-36-10
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/ISS_DVD_Lesson_series
ISS DVD Lesson series
ESA is performing experiments in space to explain basic science concepts, fitting the European curricula for pupils aged 12-18.
The lessons explain basic concepts with simple demonstrations from European astronauts during their missions on board the International Space Station. The first ESA astronauts to participate in the series are Pedro Duque, André Kuipers, Roberto Vittori and Thomas Reiter.
For each space-based demonstration, on-ground demonstrations are performed by pupils from selected schools across ESA Member States. This comparision helps to familiarise pupils with the differences between Earth and space environments.
All videos are now available for online viewing and downloading. Click a flag according to a language you would like use.
Mission 1: Newton in Space
While on board the International Space Station, Pedro Duque was filmed conducting demonstrations explaining Newton's Three Laws of Motion - the subject of lesson 1.
Mission 2: Body Space
During his DELTA Mission, ESA astronaut André Kuipers performed a number of physiology demonstrations showing the effects of weightlessness on the human body - the theme of lesson two.
Mission 3: Space Matters
During the Eneide Mission in 2005, ESA astronaut Roberto Vittori was filmed conducting demonstrations designed to explore the different structures, states and properties of matter - the topic of the third lesson.
Mission 4: Space Robotics
The theme of the fourth video in the series is space robotics. Lesson four has been produced with the support and input from ESA astronauts, robotic experts, teachers and their pupils from schools in Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
To receive a copy
10 000 copies of each ISS DVD Lesson were produced in DVD format in no fewer than 11 languages (12 languages for DVD 2 onwards). Each is accompanied by a Teacher's Guide with suggestions for related classroom experiments and activities. The ISS DVD Lessons are available to interested schools in ESA's Member States.
If you are a teacher of pupils in the 12-18 age group, and you would like a copy of one or more of the DVDs to use in your school, please complete the request form linked below.
Order one or more of the ISS DVD Lessons using the online order form »»
For any questions, please contact isseducationteam@esa.int.