ews- v-76
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Astrolab/Technology_demonstrations
Technology demonstrations
ERB - 3D video cameraA 3D video camera, the Erasmus Recording Binocular, was tested in weightlessness on the International Space Station and accurately mapped the Station's interior. To achieve this, images from three cameras are used: the ERB 3-D video camera, a Sony PD-150 video camera and a Nikon 3-D still camera.
These images were used to improve models available on the ground as well as improving the fidelity of the Space Station 3D virtual reality simulator at the Erasmus Centre located at ESTEC, ESA’s research and technology centre in Noordwijk, the Netherlands. Of special interest is filming subjects and objects moving to and from the camera and filming of objects protruding from a surface such as cables on experimental racks.
Special event mealThis French space agency CNES sponsored project provides the Station crew with high quality food for celebratory meals such as New Year, arrival of a new crew and birthdays. This gives the crew the possibility to break the monotony of standard daily food, which has a positive psychological effect, especially during long-duration flights.
SkinCareSkinCare is a human physiology experiment, which aims at characterising different parameters of human skin such as hydration grade, transepi-dermal water loss and skin surface video imaging in weightlessness. The investigators test the applicability of the space environment as a model of aging skin. Non-invasive medical equipment will be used in flight to support this experiment.
Global Transmission Services 2 (GTS-2)GTS is a technology experiment for the test, validation and demonstration of radio transmission techniques for the synchronisation of Earth-based clocks and watches from the International Space Station. In addition, the GTS data services, based on a unique coding scheme, could ultimately lead to commercial services, such as blocking stolen cars or lost credit cards, directly from space.
The previous GTS was re-activated on 5 December 2005, after theoretical investigations and practical tests found introduced corrective measures for the weaker than expected transmitted signal strength experienced by GTS receivers on the ground.