Space photos: The most amazing images this week!
By
Doris Elin Urrutia
3 hours ago
3 hours ago
Traces of moondust from Apollo 11 are part of a lawsuit, scientists send laser beams out into space and Curiosity takes a new selfie on Mars. These are some of the top photos this week from Space.com.
The smudged areas in this up-close view of the Apollo 11 lunar sample return bag are the traces of moon dust. A Kansas City, Missouri law firm has filed a lawsuit over five small strips of possibly-moon-dust-stained carbon tape that NASA used to lift moon dust off the pouch. The law firm is claiming it has a 28.5% financial stake in those strips.
Full story: Law firm claims stake in tape strips used to lift moon dust off Apollo 11 sample bag
This incredible image from the European Southern Observatory (ESO) shows four laser beams fired by scientists into space to calibrate their telescope. The target, which looks like a cosmic orchid, is the Carina Nebula and it is located about 7,500 light-years from Earth. Scientists fired lasers from a component of ESO's Very Large Telescope to correct the instrument for atmospheric blurring that happens when cosmic objects are observed from land.
Full story: Earth is fighting a laser duel with the exploding Carina Nebula
The China National Space Administration released this image of the terrain on the lunar farside. The image was taken by China's Yutu 2 rover, which is part of the Chang'e 4 mission. China is planning to launch its next lunar mission, Chang'e 5, later this month. Chang'e 4 is the first successful landing of a mission on the lunar far side.
Full story: China's Yutu 2 rover snaps stunning new panoramas from the moon's far side
A view of the suspended platform and science equipment of the world's second-largest radio dish, the Arecibo Observatory, as it appeared before damage incurred in 2020 (a cable broke in August, then another one broke in early November). The National Science Foundation announced Thursday (Nov. 19) that it will decommission the Arecibo Observatory.
Full story: Iconic Arecibo Observatory may be on the brink of collapse after cable failures
Liftoff of China's Long March 3B from Xichang on Nov. 12, 2020 created an orange-red flame that starkly contrasts the darkness of the night in this image. The rocket carried the Tiantong-1 (02) communications satellite into orbit. This is the 34th launch by China this year.
Full story: China notches 34th launch of the year with communications satellite
NASA's Curiosity Mars rover took this selfie at a location nicknamed "Mary Anning." The spot is named after an important English paleontologist who discovered marine reptile fossils in the 19th century. Curiosity took three samples of drilled rock, and scientists believe that the region surrounding this site may preserve an ancient habitable environment.
Full story: NASA's Curiosity rover snaps stunning selfie on Mars (photo)
A plush toy of ''The Child'' from Disney's Star Wars series ''The Mandalorian'' took a ride with the four astronauts who launched this week to the International Space Station. The spacefarers of NASA and SpaceX's Crew-1 mission used the toy as a zero-G indicator, which tells the crew when the launch phase of the journey has ended.
Full story: 'Baby Yoda' revealed as astronauts' zero-g indicator on SpaceX Crew-1 mission
The planetary nebula IC 4593 shines like a brilliant purple amethyst in space in this view from NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory.
IC 4593 is about 7,800 light-years from Earth and is the farthest planetary nebula that can be seen with Chandra. This view includes some visible-light observations from the Hubble Space Telescope combined with Chandra's X-ray view, according to a NASA image description. The Hubble views are the pink and green hues, while Chandra's X-ray detections show as purple.
Planetary nebulas aren't related to planets at all. They are super-hot bubbles of gas from dying stars that form when the star sheds its outer layers as it contracts. — Tariq Malik
Backdropped by a blanket of clouds, SpaceX's Crew Dragon spacecraft approaches the International Space Station with four Expedition 64 crew members in this view captured from the orbiting laboratory. The spacecraft docked with the space station Monday night at 11:01 p.m. EST (0401 Nov. 17 GMT). — Hanneke Weitering
A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket, with a Crew Dragon spacecraft on top, lifts off from NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida to deliver four new Expedition 64 crew members to the International Space Station. The Crew-1 mission lifted off from Launch Complex 39A yesterday (Nov. 15) at 7:27 p.m. EDT (0027 GMT on Nov. 16), and it is expected to dock with the International Space Station tonight at 11 p.m. EST (0400 Nov. 17 GMT). — Hanneke Weitering