2020-10-23
https://www.space.com/the-right-stuff-episode-4-recap
'The Right Stuff' recap: We've got a lot of catching up to do ('Advent')
The moon comes into focus in the fourth episode of National Geographic's "The Right Stuff."
Now on Disney Plus, the docudrama series based on Tom Wolfe's 1979 book by the same title follows NASA and its original Mercury 7 astronauts as they race against the Soviets to put the first humans into space.
Related: These astronauts read 'The Right Stuff' and flew in space
The Right Stuff by Tom Wolfe | Save 43% |
Now $10.89 on Amazon
Read the book that inspired a generation of engineers, scientists and astronauts and retells the early days of human spaceflight.View Deal
"For the first time in the history of human civilization, pictures have been taken on the hidden side of the moon."
The episode opens with the view inside a Soviet robotic probe, Luna 3, in orbit around the moon. A film roll is seen being scanned as a news commentator's voice is heard describing the feat. It is October 1959, three months after the failure of NASA's Mercury-Atlas 1 launch.
Gordon Cooper (Colin O'Donoghue) is seated in a Mercury spacecraft simulator with Deke Slayton (Micah Stock) serving as his capsule communicator, or capcom. "Trajectory off-nominal. Engine performance low," Slayton says, as a string of red lights begin to flash on his console accompanied by the buzz of an alarm. "Abort."
"Roger, activating abort handle," replies Cooper, but he cannot get the handle to move. The simulation ends. Slayton wants to know "why the hell didn't you abort?"
"I tried!" says Cooper, ripping the abort handle out of the simulator and handing it to Slayton. "It's not like we're actually flying this damn thing."
Building Project Mercury: Test Flight Photos of NASA's First Spaceship
Elsewhere, Space Task Group director Bob Gilruth (Patrick Fischler) and flight director Chris Kraft (Eric Ladin) are debating the merits of adding another test launch before the upcoming holidays. Gilruth sides with the advice of German rocket scientist Wernher von Braun, who designed the Redstone rocket that will launch the first astronaut into space and who is advocating for the additional attempt. "He's a Nazi and I don't trust him," says Kraft. Gilruth defends von Braun, describing him as central to NASA winning the space race.
"The Russians are lapping us in this race, and we've got a lot of catching up to do," says Gilruth.
Arriving back at his office, Gilruth (still with Kraft) is surprised to find the Mercury astronauts waiting for him. The men are upset with the lack of control they have when flying the spacecraft. Kraft shows them a black and white photo of the moon. "The far side," says Gilruth, explaining it is from Luna 3. "This program will go away if we don't catch up with the Russians," says Kraft, rebuking the astronauts' demands for making changes to the capsule.
Later, Alan Shepard (Jake McDorman) and nurse Dee O'Hara (Kaley Ronayne) visit a toy store to pick out gifts for his two daughters and his niece. "Louise's sister died, her daughter is staying with us," Shepard explains. "She is going to need a lot more than just a Barbie," O'Hara says.
Louise Shepard (Shannon Lucio) picks up her niece, Judith (Ella Paige), at the bus station to bring her home.
Kraft comes to von Braun's (Sacha Seberg) hotel room to check on the status of the rocket for the next day's launch attempt. Weather has already delayed several tries. Von Braun, meanwhile, is getting suited up in a Santa Claus costume.
The next morning, the Mercury-Redstone 1 rocket is standing poised for launch on Pad 5 as von Braun and his team staff the blockhouse and Kraft and his flight controllers monitor the countdown from inside Mercury Mission Control. The final seconds tick down and at T-minus zero there is a plume of smoke but instead of the Redstone lifting off, the rocket remains stationary while the Mercury capsule's launch escape tower fires off.
"We see the abort system activated the escape tower, but the booster is still on the pad. It is still powered up, it's just sitting there!" Glynn Lunney (Jackson Pace) tells Kraft.
Related: The Mercury 7 Astronauts: NASA's First Space Travelers
Kraft calls the blockhouse, but only hears German in response. Roy Hutmacher (Joshua Ritter), who is listening in on his headset, tells Kraft, "they are looking for a gun." Kraft drops his own headset and runs out of mission control.
Now in a jeep, Kraft is racing toward Launch Complex 5, where the Redstone is still fuming and the parachute from the still-attached Mercury capsule is deployed and hanging off the side. "Get out of the way!" yells Kraft as he tears past a guard station. Pulling up to the blockhouse beside the pad, Kraft sees someone headed for the rocket with a rifle. "Oh no!" yells Kraft.
Kraft jumps from the jeep and runs full speed at the man with the gun. "Stop!" he yells just before tackling the would-be shooter. "What the hell are you thinking?!?" Kraft yells at the men in the blockhouse.
"The rocket is fully fueled and the self-destruct charges are armed. Shooting holes in the booster will relieve the pressure and prevent the whole thing from exploding," von Braun calmly explains. "Unless it explodes when you shoot it," Kraft, still upset, replies. Kraft recommends doing nothing, letting the battery run down and the propellant's oxidizer to boil off, a process that will take 12 hours.
At the train station arriving home for the holidays, the Mercury astronauts are mobbed by the press and the public. A woman hands Cooper a red envelope and walks away with a smile. He chases after her and, indicating that he knows her, asks what she is doing there. "Just read the card," she says and leaves Cooper to sign autographs for a group of children waiting for him.
Later, after reading the card on his cab ride home, Cooper stuffs it into a trash can outside his garage.
Inside the Shepards' home, Louise informs Alan that Judith is now to be called by a different name. "We've decided to call her Martha. Judith is too close to Julie," Louise says, gesturing toward his daughter Julie.
John Glenn (Patrick J. Adams) and his wife Annie (Nora Zehetner) are exercising together in their living room while discussing the upcoming presidential election between Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy and the state of the space program. Annie encourages Glenn to get Kennedy to support NASA.
Trudy Cooper (Eloise Mumford) takes out the trash when she discovers the card that Gordon earlier ripped in half and tossed away. Inside, there is a handwritten note that reads, "Little Creek Motel, Room 214, Until Christmas, Please come!" It is signed "L" with a heart.
Glenn works down a list of congressmen and other contacts, calling them in his effort to get in touch with Kennedy, but comes up empty.
Alan Shepard's parents, Alan B. "Bart" Shepard, Sr. (Fredric Lehne) and Pauline Renza (Sallie Glaner) come over for Christmas Eve. Bart is critical of the decision to rename Martha and physically disciplines her when she puts her elbow on the dinner table. "This is my house, dad, I'll handle the discipline," Shepard says.
Bart continues to give Shepard a hard time. "You know what I think, dad?" Shepard says, as he slams both of his elbows down on the table, "I think you're jealous. Yeah, what I am doing now is more important than anything you've ever done." Bart replies, "You haven't done anything. Your little space program has never been more than an empty shell and now it has turned into a punchline. The Russians are flying clear to the moon. You guys can't even get a rocket off the ground."
Cooper tells Trudy that he is heading out to find a Christmas tree, but she appears skeptical that he is telling the truth.
Unable to meet up with his family due to the weather, Slayton heads to the Starlite Lounge, where he finds von Braun. von Braun criticizes Kraft, who he says will never understand what went wrong with the Redstone launch and blames it on the capsule. He then tells Slayton that Kraft secretly wants to be the pilot, but because one of his hands is deformed, he is grounded. "So now he insists on piloting the capsule from Mercury Mission Control," says von Braun.
The woman from the train station answers a knock at her hotel door. She is expecting Cooper, but it is Trudy instead. "Tell me how you thought this would go, Lurleen," says Trudy, revealing that "L" is the same woman who, at just the mention of her name, caused Cooper to punch a reporter. After Lurleen (Elizabeth Blackmore) explains that her husband left her and her parents took in the kids but rejected her, Trudy realizes that Lurleen is looking for Cooper's support and instead writes her out a $500 check. "At least you won't go home empty handed."
Related: Project Mercury, NASA's first crewed space program
Lurleen, who had an affair with Cooper before he became an astronaut, criticizes Trudy for being a pilot and a "trophy" for Cooper, who never wanted to support him, but rather "be him." The two trade barbs over who is right for Cooper when the phone rings. Trudy picks up and hears Cooper. She hangs up and walks out.
At the Pad 5 blockhouse, Kraft is analyzing lines of data when Slayton shows up. Kraft has not found an answer for what went wrong with the Mercury-Redstone 1 launch. Slayton relays what von Braun said about Kraft wanting to fly the capsule from the ground. "I dropped my peanut butter and jelly sandwich into a trash fire when I was three. Burned my hand to a crisp trying to pull it out," admits Kraft. "Von Braun is right; the Navy rejected me from flight training. I guess the guy has me all figured out."
Slayton holds up his left hand in response. Most of his ring finger is missing. "Caught it in a hay mower when I was five. Only one you can lose and still be a pilot," he tells Kraft. "Screw von Braun. Never liked that Nazi anyway. He's getting soaked at a bar in a Santa Claus beard while you're out here working. I tell you who'd I rather have as a wingman."
Robert Kennedy calls Glenn at home. "Bobby, listen, let's say your brother gets the nomination. Does he want to win Ohio in the fall?"
Trudy arrives home to find Cooper waiting. She admits to going to the hotel and challenges his intentions. "Trudy I didn't get you back so I could go to space. It is the other way around," Cooper says. "The first thing I thought when I got that call from NASA was maybe, just maybe this might give me one last shot with you. So yes, I love you."
On Christmas morning, Shepard shows Martha how to raise the American flag and asks her to do it going forward. "I don't want you to call me Martha. I want to choose my own name," she says. After suggesting "Alan," she accepts Shepard's alternative, Alice. "Good to meet you Alice," says Shepard, which prompts her to give him a hug.
It is New Year's Eve and the Mercury astronauts and their wives are at a party. Glenn confides to Scott Carpenter (James Lafferty) that Kennedy is coming to the party, but "keep it under your hat, I want it to be a surprise when he shows up." As soon as Glenn walks away, Carpenter tells his wife, Rene (Jade Albany Pietrantonio). The party is going full swing when a motorcade pulls up to the front, but instead of it being for Kennedy (who was "unavoidably detained"), Jerome Wiesner (Todd Allen Durkin) gets out. "Kennedy's special advisor for all matters science" is there in the senator's place. "Did you invite this guy?" Gilruth, annoyed, asks Glenn.
The episode ends with a countdown ... to midnight and the start of 1960.
At the start of the episode, a disclaimer appears on screen: "This dramatization, although fictionalized, is based on actual events. Dialogue and certain events and characters have been created or altered for dramatic purposes."
Here is a look at some of the right, wrong and real stuff the fourth episode portrays: