19/10/2020
NASA's OSIRIS-REx probe will snag a piece of an asteroid Tuesday! Here's how to watch.
Update for Oct. 20, 6:58 pm ET: NASA's OSIRIS-REx spacecraft has successfully performed its asteroid Bennu sample-collection attempt, though it will take up to 10 days to determine if samples were actually captured. Read our full story and wrap up here.
Original Story:
NASA will broadcast an epic "touch and go" on Tuesday (Oct. 20) as a spacecraft descends toward an asteroid called Bennu to pick up a precious sample of dust, and you can watch it all live online.
The events start today (Oct. 19) with a series of preview briefings by scientists with the OSIRIS-REx mission to Bennu. They begin at 1 p.m. EDT (1700 GMT) and run throughout the day, covering the mission's science, planetary defense against asteroids and more. You can watch it all here and on the Space.com homepage, courtesy of NASA TV.
On Tuesday, live coverage of the descent of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft, known more formally as the Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, Security-Regolith Explorer, will start at 5 p.m. EDT (2100 GMT) on NASA Television. You can also catch the action on the OSIRIS-REx Twitter feed, where you can ask questions of the landing team using the hashtag #ToBennuandBack.
Related: OSIRIS-REx: NASA's asteroid sample-return mission in pictures
If all goes to plan, the spacecraft will depart from orbit around 1:50 p.m. EDT (1750 GMT) and do its sample collection on the surface at 6:12 p.m. EDT (2212 GMT), according to a NASA statement. The landing is just one of several events that NASA will broadcast to give information about the mission.
Here are the other things the agency has planned. All times are in Eastern Daylight Time.
NASA also will host a #ToBennuAndBack Virtual NASA Social. More details are available after putting your RSVP in a Facebook event, which will provide social media updates. Participants will be able to interact with fellow space enthusiasts, virtually tour the asteroid and receive a NASA Social badge, among other activities, NASA said.