2020-04-29
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Name_Thomas_next_space_mission
Name Thomas’ next space mission!
Please note, this competition closed midnight CEST Tuesday 12 May. Thank you to everyone who submitted an idea. The winning name will be announced over the coming months – stay tuned.
ESA astronaut Thomas Pesquet is due to fly to the International Space Station in 2021 and will soon begin training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, USA after finishing a training session at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany. We have the operational side covered… but we need your help to find the name of the mission!
Thomas is a member of ESA’s astronaut class of 2009, and first flew to the Space Station in 2016 for his Proxima mission. Now he needs your help to find a suitable name for his next trip to space – a six-month mission filled with science experiments and research in microgravity and Space Station maintenance.
The name of an astronaut mission is one of its most iconic elements. It embodies the mission’s purpose, reflects the astronaut’s personality and is referenced anytime ESA reports on the astronaut’s training and work in space.
Finding the name will be the first step in creating a patch that Thomas will wear on official astronaut outfits and, as such, should be: easy to pronounce in most languages (including English and French), short enough to figure on a logo, and original enough to capture the uniqueness of a space mission.
As well as being directly involved in European spaceflight history, the winner of this naming contest, proposed by ESA in partnership with France's space agency CNES, will received a signed mission patch that will be flown on the International Space Station with Thomas.
Are you feeling inspired? Send us your submission by midnight Tuesday 12 May CEST and the result could be out of this world.
Please read the conditions below before submitting your entry.
Participation in the contest
Winner Selection
You can find further information on Thomas’ first mission name, Proxima, here. Good luck!
Click here to fill out the form and submit your entry.