2021-02-04
https://www.space.com/jeff-bezos-steps-down-amazon-ceo
We and our
store and/or access information on a device, such as cookies and process personal data, such as unique identifiers and standard information sent by a device for personalised ads and content, ad and content measurement, and audience insights, as well as to develop and improve products.
With your permission we and our partners may use precise geolocation data and identification through device scanning. You may click to consent to our and our partners’ processing as described above. Alternatively you may access more detailed information and change your preferences before consenting or to refuse consenting. Please note that some processing of your personal data may not require your consent, but you have a right to object to such processing. Your preferences will apply to this website only. You can change your preferences at any time by returning to this site or visit our privacy policy.
Blue Origin founder Jeff Bezos will step down as Amazon CEO
Amazon's founder and CEO Jeff Bezos announced Tuesday (Feb. 2) that he is stepping down this year to focus on other initiatives, including his spaceflight company Blue Origin.
Bezos announced his plan to step down in a letter to Amazon employees, who he addressed as his "fellow Amazonians." Bezos plans to stay involved with the company, but in Q3 (July-September) he'll transition to the role of executive chair of the Amazon board. Andy Jassy, the current CEO of Amazon Web Services, will replace Bezos as CEO of the company, according to the letter.
"In the Exec Chair role, I intend to focus my energies and attention on new products and early initiatives," Bezos wrote in the letter to staff. "Andy is well known inside the company and has been at Amazon almost as long as I have. He will be an outstanding leader, and he has my full confidence."
Related: NASA adds Blue Origin's New Glenn rocket as a launcher for future missions
Bezos wrote that he will remain engaged in important Amazon initiatives as Exec Chair. However, this new role will allow him the time and energy he needs to focus on other projects, including the Day 1 Fund, the Bezos Earth Fund, Blue Origin, and The Washington Post — among other passions.
"I'm super passionate about the impact I think these organizations can have," Bezos wrote in the letter.
Blue Origin is best known for being the first in the world to successfully land a reusable rocket on a landing pad. On Jan. 14, the company successfully launched its first upgraded New Shepard spacecraft for astronauts, the RSS First Step, on an uncrewed suborbital test flight, marking a big step toward human spaceflight.
"Invention is the root of our success," Bezos said in the letter. "Keep inventing, and don't despair when at first the idea looks crazy. Remember to wander. Let curiosity be your compass."