2021-01-15
https://www.space.com/apollo-11-quarantine-documentary-imax
We and our
store and/or access information on a device, such as cookies and process personal data, such as unique identifiers and standard information sent by a device for personalised ads and content, ad and content measurement, and audience insights, as well as to develop and improve products.
With your permission we and our partners may use precise geolocation data and identification through device scanning. You may click to consent to our and our partners’ processing as described above. Alternatively you may access more detailed information and change your preferences before consenting or to refuse consenting. Please note that some processing of your personal data may not require your consent, but you have a right to object to such processing. Your preferences will apply to this website only. You can change your preferences at any time by returning to this site or visit our privacy policy.
After 'Apollo 11': New short film goes into 'Quarantine' after first moon landing
Long before millions of people from around the globe isolated themselves to protect against a pandemic, three astronauts spent 21 days secluded from the rest of the world after being exposed to the moon.
"Apollo 11: Quarantine," a new short film from the team behind the feature-length documentary "Apollo 11," tells the lesser-known story that followed the historic first moon landing. Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins entered quarantine to protect the rest of humanity from any possible "moon germs" and to preserve the moon rocks they returned with them from being contaminated by life on Earth.
"I am honored to be working again with so many talented filmmakers and the innovative teams at NEON, CNN Films and IMAX," Todd Douglas Miller, "Apollo 11" and "Apollo 11: Quarantine" director and producer, said in statement released by NEON on Thursday (Jan. 14). "And [I am] very excited for audiences to experience a little-known part of history — an enduring message of hope during these unprecedented times."
Related: NASA's historic Apollo 11 moon landing in pictures
Like "Apollo 11," "Apollo 11: Quarantine" features never-before-seen 70mm large-format footage that was discovered among the holdings of the National Archives. The new 23-minute film also forgoes a narrator or modern interviews to allow the NASA archival audio and footage to create an immersive experience, bringing the viewer back into the events of the summer of 1969 and inside quarantine with the astronauts.
Co-presented by NEON and CNN Films, "Apollo 11: Quarantine" will be released exclusively in IMAX theaters beginning Jan. 29 in select locations. The film will then be available to stream via premium on-demand services beginning Feb. 5.
Miller produced "Apollo 11: Quarantine" along with Laura Kirby-Miller, Thomas Baxley Petersen and Evan Krauss. Executive producers were Amy Entelis and Courtney Sexton for CNN Films, Josh Braun for Submarine and Tom Quinn for NEON.