2017-01-19
https://www.esa.int/Education/Teachers_Corner/Watch_a_live_Education_Inflight_Call_with_ESA_astronaut_Thomas_Pesquet_on_24_January
Watch a live Education Inflight Call with ESA astronaut Thomas Pesquet on 24 January
On Tuesday 24 January, teachers and students from Ireland, Romania, and Portugal will be connected by video connection with ESA astronaut Thomas Pesquet, currently living and working on the International Space Station (ISS). A livestream of the event can be viewed by clicking on the link below.
Teachers will be asking Thomas questions about how we use space in our daily lives and how the many applications stemming from space research have changed the way we live.
Livestream, including the introductions at each site before the inflight call, will start at 15:55 CET (14:55 GMT, 16:55 EET). The actual inflight call will start at around 16:35 CET and will last about 20 minutes. Don’t miss it!
Background
Every year, ESA gives some of its ESERO offices the unique opportunity to gather primary and secondary school teachers, students, and space scientists and engineers around an inflight call with an ESA astronaut on board the ISS.
This year, local events are organised by ESERO Ireland, ESERO Romania and ESERO Portugal. These events will take place in Limerick, Timişoara, and Lisbon, respectively.
The inflight call with Thomas Pesquet is part of a vast range of educational activities delivered by ESA and its European Space Education Resource Office (ESERO) project. There are currently 10 operational ESERO Offices across Europe, covering 13 ESA Member States. ESA’s ESERO project is a collaboration between ESA, national space agencies, and educational partners.
ESEROs design and disseminate classroom resources – all tailored to the national school curricula and language - which make use of space to make teaching and learning of STEM subjects more appealing and effective. In addition, they offer teacher training workshops and conferences for both primary and secondary school teachers, and support educational hands-on projects in the country. Through their activities, ESEROs also raise awareness about STEM-related career prospects, and promote the importance of space in our daily lives.