2016-11-14
https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Preparing_for_the_Future/Space_for_Earth/When_Space_meets_Health
When Space meets Health
Human health has always benefited from cutting edge technologies so how does the space sector and its technological achievements add in this regard? Last week's “Space meets Health” gathering provided some answers.
In attendance were several industrial entities as well as the World Health Organization, offering their take on how space technology can be applied to aid health issues on earth. Complementing these perspectives was the firsthand account of ESA astronaut Claudie Haigneré. Claudie spoke of her time on the Mir and International Space Station, where her physical and cognitive skills were put through several tests.
Research conducted on the Space Station and at ESA into astronaut's health has led to several advances in human medicine. For example, measuring bone loss in astronauts as well as the effects of radiation in space have led to a better understanding of osteoporosis and how it links to that on Earth.
Jason Hatton, head of the Biology and Environmental Monitoring Science Office at ESA, gave a comprehensive overview of ESA programmes related to health. He pointed out that although a lot of technology is already available, the cooperation between industry, institutions and space agencies is of extreme importance to maintain exchange between space and terrestrial applications.
Going to space has a severe effect on the human body, not unlike the process of aging. Any knowledge gained on possible countermeasures could therefore also be applicable on Earth.
Regenerative life-support systems, such as those tested on the Space Station and at the Concordia base in Antarctica, have proven to be vital for clean water and sanitation in developing countries. Through ESA's Transfer Technology Programme hundreds of spin-offs have already proven their worth. Technology transfer goes both ways, some terrestrial applications have already found their way into space.
But how does space science factor into public health? Ramesh Krishnamurthy from the World Health Organisation stressed that space science and public health should be based on the interconnection between human health, animal health and a thriving ecosystem. At a closer glance, Krishnamurthy notes that it is clear that most UN Sustainable Development Goals are related and they all come down to healthy individuals. Matching public health-needs with space solutions should be at the top of our priority list. Integrating big-data analytics and space science and technology within national health information systems, for keeping track of epidemics and emergency response are two areas that could benefit from space applications.
Several industrial partners highlighted their fruitful cooperation with ESA with regards to health-related projects. Examples include a portable ultrasound and scanning device, portable clinics with broadband connectivity to be used in case of epidemics or natural disasters, and a scanner that can detect bacterial infections, among others.
They emphasised that connectivity is key in most cases and that it is important that we consider healthcare as a whole. Modern digital and genomic revolutions will lead to personalised healthcare where prediction and prevention become key elements.
For more information please contact: health @ esa.int