2016-09-16
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Space_to_inspire
Space to inspire
What does a doctor, a farmer and an entrepeneur have in common? They all are dreamers – and doers – who can find inspiration in space to bring benefits down to Earth.
Many promising ideas were discussed at the Space for Inspiration event at the London Science Museum this week.
Solutions ‘made in space’ are helping to shape our daily lives and address global challenges on Earth in areas such as energy, health and food production.
“We want to draw more people into the future, and explain how they can get involved. The opportunities are unlimited,” comments David Parker, ESA Director of Human Spaceflight and Robotic Exploration.
Down to you
When physicist Gregor Morfill began studying the fundamental science behind plasma – electrically charged gas – on the International Space Station more than two decades ago, he paved the way to a technology that can save many lives with the touch of a button.
“Cold-plasma tools can be used to fight superbugs that are increasingly resistant to antibiotics,” explains Gregor.
A revolutionary device is being developed to treat chronic wounds in hospitals, and should one day make it into our homes.
Scientists and private companies are being invited to take advantage of the Space Station, which is a fully operational research laboratory circling our planet.
“Research in orbit is something that is not just limited to what space agencies do,” notes Julie Robinson, NASA chief scientist for the Space Station.
Kick-starting space
The new space is a crossroad of sectors, resources and people. And it is open to a broader community. ESA is already forging partnerships with the non-space sector.
“Now is the time to plan new ways of working together,” says David Parker.
Engagement is an important part of the process. “Whether you work in the fashion, farming, food or film industries, the message is to be as inclusive as you can,” thinks film producer Duncan Copp.
“The more we assimilate the idea of space into the fabric of society, the easier people will accept it.”
When more and more people regularly enter orbit “We could industrialise spaceflight, and that will allow us to explore deep space,” believes Michael Suffredini, president of the commercial space division of Stinger Ghaffarian Technologies.
You can relive the event and watch every discussion in this repository of videos of the whole conference.