2015-01-13
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Astronauts/ESA_astronaut_Alexander_Gerst_awarded_Germany_s_Order_of_Merit
ESA astronaut Alexander Gerst awarded Germany’s Order of Merit
For his outstanding work during his Blue Dot mission on the International Space Station last year, German President Joachim Gauck awarded ESA astronaut Alexander Gerst the Officer’s Cross of the Federal Republic of Germany today.
Alexander flew to the Space Station in May 2014 together with NASA astronaut Reid Wiseman and Roscosmos cosmonaut Max Suraev to conduct experiments in weightlessness. After 166 days in space, the trio returned on 10 November, landing in the Kazakhstan steppe.
Alexander flew to the Space Station in May 2014 together with NASA astronaut Reid Wiseman and Roscosmos cosmonaut Max Suraev to conduct experiments in weightlessness. After 166 days in space, the trio returned on 10 November, landing in the Kazakhstan steppe.
The last two months have been spent debriefing international scientists whose experiments Alexander worked on in space. He is now based at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany. During his mission, the geophysicist–astronaut and volcanologist worked on more than 100 experiments.
Discovery and international cooperation
President Gauck said at the medal ceremony in Berlin: “Through your courageous commitment in space  you are a role model for cutting-edge research in Germany and Europe. Space is increasingly important to meet the challenges of society in the future.”
ESA’s Director of Human Spaceflight and Operations and former astronaut Thomas Reiter was present at the ceremony together with the head of the DLR German Aerospace Center, Jan Woerner, and German Parliamentary State Secretary Brigitte Zypries.
Thomas Reiter commented: “For me the highlight of the Blue Dot mission was Alexander Gerst’s spacewalk on 7 October 2014 that lasted more than six hours doing important maintenance work outside the International Space Station.”
Alexander took part in a number of educational, scientific and public events via live video links during his mission.
“His philosophical and scientific explanations and commitment to environmental protection, international cooperation and enthusiasm for science directly from Earth orbit have inspired a new generation of youngsters,” continued Thomas Reiter.
Alexander’s photos and videos from space fascinated followers on Earth and he is still sharing his experiences on social media.