2014-07-22
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Blue_dot/Call_Alex_live_SocialSpace_with_Alexander_Gerst_in_orbit
Call Alex: live SocialSpace with Alexander Gerst in orbit
Registration has closed.
ESA astronaut Alexander Gerst is sharing beautiful photographs from space on his social media pages. Is there something you want to ask him while he is orbiting our planet? On 22 August you could talk to him in person during ESA’s SocialSpace event.
We are inviting 40 followers to join us at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany for a SocialSpace, with Alexander joining live through a video call from the International Space Station.
The SocialSpace will take place in the homebase for all of ESA’s astronauts. As well as the main event, we will tour the premises to see how astronauts train for their missions.
The event will also include an introduction to the Station and Alex’s Blue Dot mission by an ESA astronaut, and an opportunity to meet ESA’s social media teams.
Think of what you would most like to ask Alexander in space. The 10 most interesting and original questions will be selected and will be posed directly to Alexander by the person who sent the question. People will be chosen based on their question and their presence on social media.
The most original and interesting questions will be chosen by ESA’s social media team, so research your question – every astronaut has already answered “How do you go to the toilet in space?”
How to apply
Please complete the registration form to apply. Be sure to include your name and the question you would like to ask Alexander in English.
Registration is for one person only and is non-transferable. Please do not submit multiple applications. All registrants must be at least 18 years old on 22 August 2014. Please read the full Terms and Conditions before completing your application.
Please note that ESA will not cover travel, accommodation or food expenses. The event will be held in English.
Workspace, free broadband WiFi access and catering will be provided.
Registration closes on 1 August at  10:00 GMT (12:00 CEST).
Follow @Social4Space and visit the SocialSpace blog for latest news. The hashtag is #CallAlex. We will use both to post updates and reminders about the event.
Once all applications have been processed, an email with confirmation information and additional instructions will be sent to those selected and those on the waiting list.
We expect to send notifications by 4 August. Please allow us time to process all the applications. We will keep you posted of progress.
Queries may be addressed to
contactsocialspace@gmail.com