2014-03-03
https://www.esa.int/Education/Teachers_Corner/ESA_Summer_Workshop_for_Teachers_2014
ESA Summer Workshop for Teachers 2014
This year ESA is once again organising a summer workshop for secondary school teachers of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) related subjects. The workshop  will be held at ESA’s European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), located in Noordwijk, the Netherlands, from 21 - 25 July 2014.
What to expectDuring this workshop participants will be presented with innovative ways in which space can be used as an engaging context for teaching core topics in STEM subjects. Participants will find out more about ESA Education activities and resources, as well as, current ESA missions, such as, Rosetta – Europe’s comet chaser, and the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) that transports cargo to the International Space Station.
Focus on practical sessions and space lecturesAs part of a diverse programme, practical sessions will enable participants to explore and discuss experiments that can be used to bring space into the classroom. Inspiring lectures from ESA experts will give an insight into the latest ESA missions and cutting-edge research. In addition, participants will have an opportunity to network with peers from across Europe.
Who can apply?The workshop is open to teachers of STEM related subjects in secondary schools (students 12 – 18 years old) of ESA Member States and Cooperating States*. Please note that priority will be given to teachers who have not participated in previous ESA teacher workshops.
Terms of participation:
How and when to applyA limited number of places are available at the ESA Summer Workshop for Teachers. Teachers wishing to participate in the workshop should complete the online application form. As part of the application process teachers need to briefly describe why they would like to attend the workshop and how they plan to disseminate the knowledge gained, including ESA’s classroom resources. Teachers will be selected to attend the workshop based on the information provided in the online application form.
The deadline for receipt of applications is 25 April 2014 12:00 CEST (10:00 GMT).
Successful applicants will be informed that they have secured a place at the workshop on or before 16 May 2014.
Workshop detailsThe workshop will take place at ESTEC, ESA’s largest establishment located in Noordwijk in The Netherlands. The workshop programme will commence with a welcome reception at Space Expo, a visitors centre dedicated to space, a short walk from the ESTEC site, at 16:00 on Monday 21 July 2014. The workshop will conclude at 16:00 on Friday 25 July 2014.
The working language of the workshop will be English; participants must have sufficient command of the language to be able to fully participate in all sessions of the workshop.
Attendance to the entire workshop is mandatory. Participants are encouraged to bring their personal laptops. Internet access will be organised on location.
Terms of participationTeachers applying to attend the workshop agree that, if selected, they will carry out all of the activities listed below, following their participation.
Sponsorship and costsThere is no fee to participate in the workshop. ESA will arrange and sponsor the costs of hotel accommodation, local transport, lunched and refreshments for all selected participants during the workshop, as well as one social dinner.
Participants are expected to cover the costs of their travel to and from the Netherlands and the cost of evening meals, with the exception of the social dinner.