2013-10-21
https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Education/Mission-X_jump_for_the_Moon
Mission-X: jump for the Moon
Next year’s Mission-X: Train Like an Astronaut challenge is set to take off with the largest community of future space explorers ever. Thousands of students from nearly 25 countries are on their marks to start exercising like spacefarers.
This educational programme invites schoolchildren aged 8–12 years to learn what it takes to be an astronaut. Teams will leave the launch pad in January 2014 to perform physical activities and learn about healthy nutrition.
More and more countries are infected with the Mission-X fever. New to the community are Australia, Chile, Romania, Sweden and the Republic of Ireland. From Russia to Indonesia, South Africa to Canada, students will earn points by completing activities inspired by astronaut training.
The nine-week challenge encourages scientific reasoning and teamwork and involves exercise modules ‘Jump for the Moon’ and ‘Do a Spacewalk’. There is place in the Mission-X programme for all children explorers. Ten physical activities have been adapted for children with special needs.
ESA has teamed up with NASA and other space agencies to invite young space explorers to get involved. This year’s Mission-X ambassador is NASA astronaut Mike Hopkins. Talking from the International Space Station, Mike will encourage young people worldwide to participate in the challenge.
Following the Mission-X mission plan, teams of children will train to earn points during school, with tasks targeting strength, endurance, coordination, balance and spatial awareness.
Teachers will be well equipped. In addition to training days and tutorial videos, an online international forum is available online for exchanging tips on fitness exercises. Each school can follow at its own pace and update their progress via the online blog on the official Mission-X website.
The countdown to Mission-X 2014 has begun. Check out the mission plan and don’t miss the opportunity to enjoy fitness, healthy eating and problem-solving the astronaut way.
Mission-X mission plan
9 December                 Registration deadline
13 January                   Launch event
15 March                     Mission-X ends
Registration
To find out your country point of contact send an email to isseducationteam@esa.int